Amira 0.1.0
===========

A Self-Sovereign Web of Trust Engagement Model

Christopher Allen
&lt;[*ChristopherA@LifeWithAlacrity.com*](mailto:ChristopherA@LifeWithAlacrity.com)&gt;\

Joe Andrieu, Legendary Requirments, LLC,
&lt;[*joe@legreq.com*](mailto:joe@legreq.com)&gt;

Shannon Appelcline, Skotos Tech,
&lt;[*shannona@skotos.net*](mailto:shannona@skotos.net)&gt;

Lyre Calliope, [*@CaptainCalliope*](http://twitter.com/captaincalliope),
&lt;[*lyre.calliope@gmail.com*](mailto:lyre.calliope@gmail.com)&gt;

Toni Lane Casserly, [*@tonilanec*](http://www.twitter.com/tonilanec),
Cultu.re / CoinTelegraph,
&lt;[*tonilanecasserly@gmail.com*](mailto:tonilanecasserly@gmail.com)&gt;

Raghav Chawla,
&lt;[*chawlaraghav@gmail.com*](mailto:chawlaraghav@gmail.com)&gt;

Tim Chen, Coding Dojo,
&lt;[*tchen@codingdojo.com*](mailto:tchen@codingdojo.com)&gt;

David Fields, PTB Ventures
&lt;[*dave@ptbvc.com*](mailto:dave@ptbvc.com)&gt;

Michael Haley, AlphaPoint,
&lt;[*michael@alphapoint.com*](mailto:michael@alphapoint.com)&gt;

Pat McBennett, Mastercard,
&lt;[*pat.mcbennett@mastercard.com*](mailto:pat.mcbennett@mastercard.com)&gt;

Shireen Mitchell, Stop Online Violence Against Women,
&lt;[*digitalsista@gmail.com*](mailto:digitalsista@gmail.com)&gt;

Heather Vescent, The Purple Tornado,
&lt;[*puissant@heathervescent.com*](mailto:puissant@heathervescent.com)&gt;

Kaliya “Identity Woman” Young ,
&lt;[*kaliya@identitywoman.net*](mailto:kaliya@identitywoman.net)&gt;

**Introduction**

> [*https://github.com/WebOfTrustInfo/rebooting-the-web-of-trust-fall2017/blob/master/topics-and-advance-readings/RWOT-User-Story.md*](https://github.com/WebOfTrustInfo/rebooting-the-web-of-trust-fall2017/blob/master/topics-and-advance-readings/RWOT-User-Story.md)

**System**

Amira, also known as BetterWorldHacker23, learns about and uses RISK,
the Reputation & Identity Software-Assurance Kit, to develop and deploy
a new application using an anonymous identity. The RISK system
confidentially matches people across the planet, allowing software
development and other forms of collaborative work to be executed and
compensated without compromising real-world identity. Participants in
the RISK system are vetted through Web of Trust connections. The RISK
system allows participants to opt-in to pseudonymous social reputation.
The integrity of applications is cryptographically ensured.

[media/image5.png]

**Stewards**

Throughout Amira’s experience, several different individuals create and
query information in our distributed application (RISK).

> **BetterWorldHacker24** -- Amira’s successor as an app maintainer.
>
> **Benjamin --** Manager at women’s service non-profit. Looking to
> connect with a developer to build an app. He is connected to
> individuals via the Web of Trust.
>
> **Charlene --** A friend of Amira. She knows Benjamin through the Web
> of Trust and contributes to Amira’s reputation.
>
> **Elias** -- A mercenary hacker working for the Syrian Hacker Army.
>
> **Zahid** -- Amira’s ex-husband.

**Assumptions**

**Stage 1 — Pre-contact** ***(Before contact, both parties engage in
activities that lead to contact. )***

Amira escaped her life in Syria where she was an abused hostage bride to
her husband, Zahid, who had a position of some power and influence in
the Syrian regime. Resettling in Boston, Amira was able to train as a
computer programmer. She took a job at a conservative bank that pays her
bills and gives her a place in society, but she wants to make more of a
difference in the world.

Local non-profit manager Ben was interviewed on Cambridge Community
Television[^1] about his vision for supporting women living in
oppression by giving them access to tools for anonymous outreach to
local communities when facing domestic violence, sexual assault, and
other forms of harm. He knows many communities have “women’s safe
houses” to provide support for challenging situations. Ben also knows
there are serious communication challenges between women, supportive
communities, and safe houses. Community leaders and women seeking safety
need both privacy and verification, enabling access to aid and
assistance while ensuring safe houses remain secure.

Amira sees Ben on TV and wants to support his cause. However, joining
forces to contribute to this issue is controversial for Amira; while she
deeply wants to engage in this type of work, she is concerned about
being associated with it, because it might cause problems at her
conservative bank or worse bring her to the attention of her ex-husband,
Zahid. Amira remains determined and begins looking for a system to allow
her to develop socially responsible apps anonymously.

**Stage 2 — Contact *(Initial contact is made between the individual and
an initial steward.)***

Amira reaches out to a trusted friend Charlene and asks for advice
concerning the best approach to contact Ben in pursuit of developing an
application to help women in need. Charlene suggests Amira use RISK, the
Reputation & Identity Software-assurance Kit.

Amira downloads the kit, and creates a unique identifier in the form of
a DID, a Decentralized Identifier[^2], on the RISK system. Amira asks
Charlene for her support in verifying and co-signing her claim.

Amira writes a claim (a Verifiable Claim) about her capabilities as a
mobile software developer, associates it with her profile, and asks
Charlene for an endorsement. Charlene endorses the Verifiable Claim.

Charlene then uses her own account on RISK to seek out Ben. She finds
he’s on the system and separated by just two degrees, The relationship
gap is small enough that RISK will allow Charlene to send Ben an
introduction and request that he connect with Amira.

Ben receives the RISK message, sees that Charlene is connected through a
good friend and reviews Amira’s profile. Ben only knows Amira as
BetterWorldHacker23. The RISK software automatically verifies the
attached claims in Amira’s profile. Ben can immediately see that
Charlene endorsed Amira as a world-class programmer. Ben is interested
in having a dialogue with BetterWorldHacker23 about how her skills can
support his organization's cause.

**Stage 3 — Negotiation *(The initial steward investigates and inquires
to decide the most appropriate direction for the individual.
Negotiations may occur.)***

Amira and Ben discuss Ben’s project, called SisterSpaces. Ben describes
what he wants for an initial Minimum Viable Product; Amira asks
clarifying questions to understand what exactly is necessary to meet
Ben’s objectives, including timeframe. After a written SOW (statement of
work) is established, Amira proposes a price and terms for the initial
deposit and subsequent payments. After some back and forth, the two
agree on scope and terms. As part of the process, Ben re-reviewed
Charlene’s profile, given that she is the only link Ben has to Amira
outside Amira’s own representations of her ability. Charlene has been
involved in lots of interesting projects, including some exceptionally
complex technical achievements. Although Amira wasn’t involved in any of
those initiatives, they provided relevant context for evaluating
Charlene’s endorsement. In addition, Ben was impressed with the kinds of
questions Amira asked. She clearly understood several of the potential
problems, and had good ideas about how to address them cost-effectively.
Ben decides that since this first app is relatively simple, he’d take a
gamble on “BetterWorldHacker23”.

**Stage 4 — Contract *(Based on triage and negotiations, both parties
agree on a particular course of action. )***

Ben creates a Verifiable Claim to encompass the mutually agreed upon
terms of Amira’s offer to build out an app to protect women,
SisterSpaces. Ben signs the Verifiable Claim, making it a Verifiable
Credential, defining the offer of contract. He send the contract to
Amira. Amira countersigns the credential, creating a Verifiable Profile.
Sending it to Ben, she accepts the offer and consummates the contract.
Amira also posts a hash of the profile to the RISK contract registry.

**Stage 5 — Consent *(Consent is asked and given for creating an
identity record, which is then provisioned) ***

When Amira is ready to commit and share the code she is developing for
the app, she must individually consent to the release of the code. Once
the code has been pushed up to the remote Git repository, Ben has the
ability to pull the code and demo the newest release on his personal
phone/computer. Feedback to change or approve the app in the current
state is shared. Once Ben has approved and consented to the public
release of the software, he goes through the process to release the
updated version of SisterSpaces to the app market.

Ben and Amira create a Verifiable Claim which gives them both,
individually, permission to make reputational assertions in the RISK
system concerning the fulfillment of the contract, referenced by the
hash, as recorded in the RISK contract registry.

Amira’s consent is required for any commits to the source code, while
Ben’s consent is required to push the app. Both must consent to make
reputational assertions. Reputational assertions may be mutually shared,
or made for only one individual in the agreement. Reputational
assertions cannot be made if the Verifiable Claim is not posted in
advance of the fulfillment of the contract.

**Stage 6 — Disclose & Configure (Tim) *(Information is shared and
associated with the individual. Services are configured.)***

Amira and Ben post their authorizing Verifiable Claims to the RISK
reputation system. Now that they have disclosed their contractual
obligations and intentions for reputational assertions, Ben and Amira
begin to work on building the infrastructure of the software project.

Amira creates a private Git repo on an account used solely for
SisterSpaces and adds Ben as a collaborator. She links her DID to commit
permissions, thus preventing any other individual or group from
modifying the code in the repo.

Ben registers publicly as an app developer on several popular app
marketplaces. Ben becomes the customer facing identity and publisher of
the SisterSpaces app.

**Stage 7 — Services (Michael) *(Services are provided.)***

Amira wraps version 1.0.0 of SisterSpace, signing it with her
BetterWorldHacker23 pseudonym, and sends it to Ben for review with an
invoice that includes a QR code to the Bitcoin, or alternative digital
currency address she controls. Ben tests the app locally and, finding it
satisfies all requirements in their spec, payms Amira in Bitcoin. Both
Ben and Amira, as mutually consented, post reputation - Ben to Amira for
having completed the application at world-class standards, and Amira to
Ben for having rendered agreed-upon payment on time and without
friction.

**Stage 8 — Enhancements (Michael) *(Enhancements are offered and
accepted.)***

Amira and Ben, upon discussing support and maintenance for SisterSpace,
decide to strike an additional deal for Amira to provide ongoing support
for the app. The two agree that Amira will resolve up to 15 support
tickets and contribute 120 hours of development in exchange for a
one-time payment from Ben in Bitcoin or another digital currency. Amira
cuts another invoice, and this time, after mutual trust has been
established to a certain degree, Ben pays upfront in Bitcoin.

**Stage 9 — Updates (Raghav)*(Anticipated changes in information lead to
revised records.)***

Amira now has a second contract and Verifiable Claim hashed to the RISK
system, and is experiencing increasing volume of offers from new
socially responsible projects like PaxPlace and LibertySpace. For the
first time, Amira considers this kind of work could become a full time
job. To support this potential, Amira creates a new bank account and a
Verifiable Claim containing her new payment address. She signs it with
her DID, and sends it to Ben.

Ben receives the claim. The RISK system ensures the authenticity of the
source of this new information. He updates his records with the new
address to enable all new payments to be sent to the new address of
BetterWorldHacker23.

With a bit of cash in pocket, Amira takes a vacation to Europe — where
unforeseen disaster strikes!

Elias is a mercenary hired by the Syrian Hacker Army who takes orders
from Amira’s ex-husband, Zahid. Elias hacks into Amira’s laptop after
she logs into the public airport wifi. Elias is thrilled to discover the
public and private keys associated with Amira’s RISK DID! He uses the
hacked information to assume Amira’s identity on the RISK platform.
Elias now has stolen the agency to communicate as Amira, and has started
to make updates of his own to her DID — including a change to that locks
Amira out of her identity completely!

The Syrian Hackers Army now controls SisterSpaces, a growing irritant to
the regime!

**Stage 10 — Problems/Issues (Joe) *(Issues beyond the normal support
interfaces arise and are resolved.)***

Elias proceeds to patch the SisterSpaces source code so that all traffic
is also sent to a Syrian surveillance system and committed to their
GitHub repo. Posting as Amira (aka, BetterWorldHacker23), Elias sends a
message to Ben, telling Ben about “a small bug fix” for SisterSpace, and
pushing him to immediately release the “new and improved” v1.0.1. Ben,
not realizing Amira’s account has been compromised, submits the v1.0.1
update to the app store.

Returning from her vacation a week and a half later, Amira realizes
she’s lost control of her RISK privileges. Not only has a fake app been
released, but she can’t even check GitHub to see what the hacker changed
in the new version. Amira calls Charlene for help. Charlene immediately
sends a message to Ben, telling him that SisterSpace has been
compromised. Taking no chances, Ben immediately disables
BetterWorldHacker23’s access to GitHub, reverts the recent GitHub
commits, updates the version, and pushes v1.0.2 to the app store.

The problem remains that Amira has no way to recover the stolen DID. Now
that Elias and his SHA cohorts have acquired the master key to Amira’s
DID, they own the identity instead of Amira. Due to the decentralized
nature of the RISK system, Amira has no programmatic method to get the
original BetterWorldHacker23 DID back into her possession. Instead of
trying to recover her former DID, Amira creates a new DID and registers
it with RISK; she’ll still need to recover the claims that were
associated with her previous DID at a future stage.

**Stage 11 — Maintenance (Shannon) *(Software, hardware or operations
are updated and upgraded.)***

Meanwhile, the stewards of the decentralized RISK system have been
considering a RIP (Risk Improvement Proposal) concerning reputation
claims. Previously, reputations on the RISK system were limited to
one-on-one reveals. Under this new RIP, users could opt-in to aggregate
their reputations.

The vast majority of the RISK network developers signal approval for the
RIP, and it comes into use with the new release from Risk Core. Users
begin to use new aggregated reputations.

Amira reflects with somber nostalgia on the loss of her established
reputation. When the original BetterWorldHacker23 DID was stolen, she
was forced to create a new DID and cannot take advantage of the
interesting new capability to merge her reputations as a result.

**Stage 12 — Migration (Shannon) *(Records are moved, transformed to a
new schema, input or output.)***

Amira was interested in new aggregated reputations because SisterSpace
has been very successful, and the possibility of breaking away from her
work at the bank to make a career out of professionally producing
socially responsible software is growing tantalizingly closer. The
reputation aggregation would have allowed her to more easily advertise
her successful social coding work.

Thinking about new possibilities gives Amira the incentive to move her
DID away from the RISK blockchain to a different blockchain that
supports more capabilities. This is a complete migration of information:
because of the DID’s portability, Amira can move all of her keys, and,
would have been able to move her reputation and claims if she hadn’t had
them stolen. Amira doesn’t add any personally-identifiable information
when she moves her DID to the new blockchain, but her data is now on a
public blockchain that’s intended to be more searchable and accessible.
She hopes to take advantage of this in the future to find other
meaningful jobs.

**Stage 13 — Recovery (Shannon) *(Lost credentials or identifiers are
restored or reset.)***

Happy with her use of a new blockchain, Amira takes the time to recover
the rest of what she lost when she had to create her new DID. She
manages this through a system of social recovery. First, she reaches
back out to Charlene. They meet in person to confirm the change, then
Charlene reaches out to Ben. After Ben assures himself that Charlene’s
account hasn’t been hacked, he extends the Git and release permissions
for SisterSpace to Amira’s new DID. He also revokes his contract with
her old DID and with Amira creates a contractual claim for her new DID.

Charlene and Ben also recreate the reputation claims that they’d
previously written for Amira, It’s a bit trickier for Amira to get back
in touch with her customers at FreedomSpace, LibertySpace, and PaxPlace.
To help, Charlene and Ben issue claims that Amira’s new DID was indeed
the author of those programs. The publishers of FreedomSpace and
PaxPlace consider the various claims made by Charlene and Ben about
Amira, and decide that the new DID indeed represents BetterWorldHacker23
and with her permission they write new reputation claims for her new
DID, on the new blockchain. The publisher of LibertySpace is much more
security-paranoid and opts not to.

**Stage 14 — Exit (Michael) *(The individual concludes their
relationship with stewards in this lifecycle.)***

With dreams of a new career dancing in her head, Amira suddenly gets a
surprise at work.

She is tapped on the shoulder and asked to come by the CIO’s office. She
learns that her employer is performing a comprehensive overhaul of its
internal systems and that the CIO is offering her the role of Principal
Architect. Amira accepts the role - not only is it a significant
promotion, but the overhaul will provide tangible security benefits to
millions of account holders - realizing she will no longer be able to
continue work on SisterSpaces. She discusses the matter with Ben and
they agree to end their contract. Ben revokes BetterWorldHacker23’s
write access to GitHub, and strikes up a new contracts with another
developer, BetterWorldHacker24, who begins to work on version 2.0.1.

**Stage 15 — Re-engagement (Michael) *(The individual is invited and
accepts a new opportunity to engage the system.)***

A year into the rebuild, the bank’s CIO has been replaced and Amira is
fed up - the architecture she has spent the past twelve months modeling
and proving out has been mothballed, and the entire overhaul has been
put on hold. She tries the latest version of SisterSpace. While the app
has become popular, it is straining under heavy technical debt. Amira
reaches out to Ben once again with her BetterWorldHacker23 handle, and
the two immediately strike a full-time contract to get SisterSpace back
on track. Amira gives notice to the bank and throws herself into her
dream job of writing socially-responsible software.

**Information Lifecycle Engagement Model**

The 15-stage model presented here is an instance of an Information
Lifecycle Engagement Framework, as illustrated below.

[media/image4.png]

Each phase in the model is a concise description of one or two
interactions illustrating the phase. Rather than attempting to describe
every interaction across multiple customers, the engagement model
captures illustrative interactions for each phase in the lifecycle of a
particular individual’s engagement with the system. The whole should be
readable as a sympathetic narrative, clarifying the motivations of all
parties and the viability of the described use. We use it to tease out
the human requirements independent of the underlying technology.

This Information Lifecycle Engagement Model is based on the work of Joe
Andrieu and Ian Henderson from [**The Customer-Supplier Engagement Model
Quick
Starter**](http://kantarainitiative.org/confluence/display/infosharing/Customer-Supplier+Engagement+Model+Quick+Starter)[^3]*.*
We have re-interpreted and expanded the the 12 phases of the
Customer-Supplier Engagement Model for suitability to a Syrian refugee
in Greece. Our initial change shifted the language from commercial
concepts to more general identity information. We also added
Maintenance, Migration, and Recovery phases to address the needs of
operating an ongoing system.

The premise remains: working through each phase in the model provides a
comprehensive yet lightweight review of the necessary transactions. This
can be accomplished prior to a detailed specification of the system,
providing a coherent statement of functional requirements even as design
and implementation details change.

bit.ly/joram100

tinyurl.com/alices-ddo

tinyurl.com/customer-supplier

NOTES
=====

**R**eputation &

**I**dentity

**S**oftware-assurance

**K**it

L\*\*\*\*\*\*\*ing

E

**S**elf

**S**overeign

**\*\*\*RESTORATION AND REHABILITATION\*\*\***

Maintain-distribute software @ malicious-user / hostile env. resistant

Software Assurance

Trusted Software

Possibly useful background information:

-   [*https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Women\_in\_Syria*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Women_in_Syria)

-   

Fundamentally a key system, both Donna and A are signing software with a
key system.

Trust, what do keys represent, prove reputation and identity,

Protecting the software from getting hijacked, preserving the integrity
of the software.

Trust network to monitor when software is comprised

Identity without traceability / pseudonymous-anonymous identity

Censorship resistance for software development

Threats to Amira

Is it digital?

Growing up in a major city doesn’t mean one feels safer from attack

Is the threat being doxxed and swatting ? \[Yes, for sure\]

If the threat is doxxing, the location is not relevant

Threat definitely includes maybe losing her job

**Two Acts**

Act 1: A bored banker, Amira wants more excitement in her life. To make
a difference, she has decided to use her coding for good by offering her
coding skillz for app development. She hears about an opportunity to
work on her dream app from Benjamin, and her friend Charlene knows Ben.
Problem is, Amira wants her involvement to remain anonymous, she doesn’t
even want Ben to know her identity. But she needs to be able to prove
she has the skills. Charlene is able to recommend Amira anonymously to
Ben through an anonymous developer environment. Amira writes the app
with Benjamin.

Act II: Syrian Hackers Army attacks Amira by stealing her computer to
gain access to her app source code. In doing so, they gain access of her
app keys (they stole them when they stole the laptop, which gives them
control of (app control is stolen)). App users at risk. They could be
identified and targeted by the Army. Key management saves the day.

Act III: Potential additional scenes, about getting investment, going
public with her reputation.

[media/image3.png]

Notes on Stage 2:

==

NOTES

*Amira is up late at night and comes across a technology community where
app ideas and developers get connected to each other. She comes across a
project to develop an app that &lt;describes the app&gt;. Her profile is
anonymous and she wants to connect to learn more/discuss with the
project lead. Her friend, Charlene is connected to the project lead.
Amira wants to maintain her anonymity, so she asks Charlene to
facilitate the connection.*

*\[maybe wants to do something more meaningful than her bank job, long
term*

*Hears about Ben’s desire to have someone write an app to help …*

*Ben has an idea for &lt;app description&gt;. He has posted his idea to
a technology community that connects ideas with developers. Some
developers have detailed profiles, while others are anonymous. Ben is
friends with many people in his local tech community, one of them
Charlene, is active at local tech events. *

*Ben receives a developer interest request from an anonymous developer.
This developer’s profile is *

*\[How can she get into a system that will protect her privacy?*

[^1]: https://www.cctvcambridge.org/about

[^2]: https://github.com/WebOfTrustInfo/rebooting-the-web-of-trust-fall2017/blob/master/topics-and-advance-readings/did-primer.md

[^3]: http://kantarainitiative.org/confluence/display/infosharing/Customer-Supplier+Engagement+Model+Quick+Starter
