**The Digital Citizen:**

**Incentivising collaborative behaviour in decentralised networks via
identity frameworks**

By Siu Kei Chung, Shannon Appelcline, Ian Grigg, Jakub Lanc, Bill
Tulloh, Ethan Brown

Abstract (later)

In a network of decentralised systems where individuals form communities
and operate them as a collective, each network is maintained for the
common good of providing a utility to the participants of the network.

Introduction
------------

We live in a digital world bla bla…

Everything will be encoded digitally

Everything will be some form of personal interaction

Discuss motivations and incentivisation of collaboration in
decentralised networks. How does identity play a role here?

We can ground our concepts best by laying out some use cases.

### Use Cases

**1/ Chamas**

In developing nations and immigrant enclaves, social savings groups form
to manage one of their biggest challenges: corruption resulting in theft
of savings. To counter widespread lack of security, groups of typically
women come together on a regular basis to save and to invest money. As a
group, they operate together, transparently and safely, and thus can
collect, account, keep and build savings.

Typical groups, called chamas in Kenya, stockvel in South Africa, Hui in
China and many other names, have a focussed purpose. One minimal form
simply rotates the money randomly like a lottery. More sophisticated
forms save money over time for investments in working assets such as
buses, or to provide the working capital for all the members.

**2/ Chatham House Rule**

The ‘rule’ pioneered at Chatham House creates a special temporary
shelter for freedom of expression within difficult circumstances. They
are designed to encourage open discussion and sharing of information.
The rule itself is quite simple:

> “When a meeting, or part thereof, is held under the Chatham House
> Rule, participants are free to use the information received, but
> neither the identity nor the affiliation of the speaker(s), nor that
> of any other participant, may be revealed".

The Chatham House rule place no restrictions on the participants
internal discussion, but restricts what they can say externally. By
limiting the release of identifying information, participants can freely
express ideas that they would not wish to be associated with when taken
out of that particular context.

Chatham House rule recognize that the dialogue flourishes when it is
both open and open-ended. Ideas that exist as part on an ongoing
discussion have a different meaning when taken out of that context and
fixed as single statement.

It also recognizes that the people involved in the discussion are
multi-dimensional playing many roles. Things said in one role may not
have the same meaning when said by the same person speaking in a
different role. Productive conversations depend on respecting the
autonomy of the participants, and ensuring that they follow a peer to
peer, and not a dominant-submissive model.

**3/ RWOT**

Rebooting the Web of Trust is a cooperative design workshop that allows
individuals to come together and produce collaborative white papers over
the course of three days. It does so through an organizational process
that first determines topics of interest to the community and then
filters individuals into those groups, with this relatively structured
process producing groups of like-minded individuals who are most likely
to work together on a collaborative paper. Once organized into a group,
the members largely stay within that group, though they may reach out to
other groups and the larger community for advice, ideas, or specific
knowledge.

Members of groups are encouraged to listen to each other and do their
best to incorporate the ideas of individuals into the group, but as each
paper comes to a conclusion, a Lead Author is given the authority to
make final decisions about the paper; if an individual doesn’t like the
decisions made by the lead, then he can choose to leave the group,
removing his name from the final paper.

The Problem Statement
---------------------

Each of these use cases describe physical groupings of people coming
together for collaborative purposes. However, today, many such group
processes are primarily or completely conducted online.

There are dangers to this new frontier of digital collaboration. As more
and deeper information is placed online, attackers of various forms
collect the information and harvest the value outside the scope of fair
collaboration, and raising risks for the individuals and the group that
imperils the positive collaboration. Attackers are numerous:
governments, scammers, corporations such as the G-**MAFIA**, organised
crime rings. Likewise the technicalities of the attacks are deep and
complex, certainly above the capabilities of the ordinary member of
society.

We cannot go back - the digital genie is decidedly out of the bottle. So
we must go forward and create the structure - legal, institutional,
technical - that best protects and enables the individual and their
community in digital space.

How do we protect & foster the individual and the community in digital
space?

How do create civilisation in digital space?

This is a multi-faceted enquiry. Some of the issues coming into this
are:

Principles
----------

\[these are the principles we learned from the use cases\]

In constructing a world for the digital citizen, there are a number of
principles and assumptions we would like to preserve in the networks
that are built.

\[we’re constructing these principles from a small group of use cases;
certainly other use cases might suggest other principles, which could
similarly be applied to digital systems.\]

1/ Purpose
----------

\[common value\]

\[lifetime of usefulness\]

The Purpose principle describes the intent of a community’s existence
which is built upon a set of common values. These values may or may not
be explicitly stated but are represented by an agreed set of procedures
that define how a community will intend to interact to produce an
intended output. This output is the express reason for the formation of
such a community which may change if the common value set shared by its
members change. A community may have multiple purposes and arise through
community agreement. There may also be agreed code of conduct that
attempts to dispel behaviour that does not contribute to the purpose of
the community or to better encourage the achievement of the purpose.

In chamas, members gather and pool funds together to facilitate a safer,
more secure way to save funds in corrupt societies. This explicitly is
the purpose of a chama and the sole reason for the creation of the
community. The Chatham House rule’s purpose was to provide an isolated
environment for expression to allow those in more complex circumstances
to remain anonymous and unaffiliated to their comments when made under
the rule.

2/ Conduct
----------

Conduct requires that there be a set of rules rules, whether explicitly
stated or not, for how the people in a community interact. It describes
their behavior toward each other and toward the community as a whole.
Communities are particularly strong when conduct aligns well with
purpose.

In Chamas, there are specific rules for when loans are repaid and when
money is put it and taken out that help to ensure anti-corruption
conduct. In the Chatham Rule, the conduct rules are equally precise,
requiring the anonymization of personal information. Rebooting the Web
of Trust requires conduct that ensures that everyone be heard. In all
cases these closely align with goals, which preserve funds, preserve
anonymity, and sustain creativity, respectively.

3/ Inclusion
------------

Inclusion requires that everyone have a voice in the community. It’s not
the same as saying that everyone has a veto, simply that they’re heard.
It also doesn’t state that everyone acts as peers (though that’s another
principle, mutuality).

In Chamas, each member has a vote. Obviously, everyone can speak in a
community ruled by the Chatham rules, though it’s not a requirement of
the system itself. In RWOT, ensuring that everyone is heard is a core
rule of Conduct.

4/ Mutuality
------------

It is important (why?) to preserve the equality of relationships as much
as possible. When a person relates to another, that relationship should
be balanced, bi-directional and equivalent to the extent reasonably
possible or useful. While a good principle, this is not always possible.
Where a relationship already includes some asymmetry, this cannot be
remedied just by imposing mutuality. E.g., lender & borrower will
display asymmetry of power and dependency.

In chamas, each member is entitled to the same savings and loans
facilities. For the Chatham House Rule, members of corporations and
regulators alike can rely that the other will not report their names as
attributions to comments. Within this paper, each of our authors has
contributed to one or more of these principles.

5/ Privacy
----------

Privacy for individuals today is almost directly dependent on the march
to digitise all the things. As we become an increasingly
Internet-dependent world, possibilities to amass more and more data
increase, and opportunities to monetise that data are boundless. With
Snowden, GDPR and recently Cambridge Analytica, it is no longer
reasonable to ignore the commercial surveillance as a serious threat to
society. People are angry.

Decentralised efforts have yet to show fruit. Chief among these is the
dilemma of putting all our personal data onto a blockchain; even hashes
of data are effectively considered a no-go by data protection
regulators.

Chamas are formed to protect the privacy, and more specifically the
financial safety by privacy of their savings. Chatham House Rule
preserves the privacy of the individual, and thus the safety of the
corporation or government department in sharing views and information.
RWOT has in the past followed the guide of no attribution, but
apparently this RWOT \#8 was infected by the twitter bug.

\[Discuss the implications on privacy of identity capture on
decentralised networks. How can privacy be upheld with the identity
framework?\]

\[assumption of community\]

6/ Freedom of Exit and Consensual Entry
---------------------------------------

Belonging to a community should be voluntary. Individuals should be able
to exit communities that no longer meet their needs. For the exit option
to be meaningful, they should have options to join new communities.
Communities, however, should have a say about who its members are, so
such entry should be based on mutual consent. The exit option needs to
be more than just the formal ability to exit -- it must address issues
of the cost of exit, and the cost and availability of joining or
creating new communities.

In Chamas, membership is by consent. The exit option is possible in
principle, but in certain circumstances may not be practical.
Participating in Chatham House rule is voluntary. Participants can
choose to participate, or chose to leave to form or join other
discussion forums that follow Chatham House or a different set of rules.
The low cost of implementing Chatham House rules or others makes the
exit practical.

\[lots of digital communities; no stateless digital citizens\]

7/ Skin in the Game
-------------------

The amount of risk taken by individuals is generally correlated with the
seriousness with which members participate, and therefore the strength
of the group and its relationships. As an observation, this strength
will flow into any secondary benefit of the group, for example the
capability to deliver useful identity information such as verifiable
credentials.

For example, a RWOT event might have the light risk of being excluded
from future events, whereas a chama might have the life savings of a
family at risk. A Chatham House meeting would likely be formed of
individuals within a sustained business such as banking and the long
term reputation of each member would be at stake. Members caught
announcing attributed statements could be ostracised, losing
communication possibilities and reputation.

8/ Incentives
-------------

People join groups to get benefits. Often tied to purpose, rewards can
consist of titles, prizes, mentions, or direct profits. Incentives can
be considered more broadly: Maslow’s Pyramid suggestions that a sense of
belonging and purpose leads to self esteem, creating an environment for
further sharing.

Incentives and rewards can range from subtle to concrete. Chatham House
Rule meetings provide the chance to informally exchange key opinions and
information that would formally be kept hidden. RWOT paper authors learn
from each other and see their work spread broadly and influencing future
work. Members in a chama may share profits from their joint investments
according to their shares, or they may get their savings in order so as
to get their children into fully paid private school.

9/ Accountability
-----------------

Accountability is the flipside of incentives: though people are awarded
for taking beneficial activities without a group, they also need to be
held accountable, in some way, for harmful activities taken within the
group. Accountability could be encouraged through disincentives. There
could be also be graduated punishments, starting with counseling,
warnings, and fines. An individual could lose privileges with a
community. At the ultimate level, an individual could be forced to exit
a community; if this is an ultimate punishment, then there must be ways
to ensure that the individual can’t return under another alias.

In Chamas, fines might be levied against minor conduct violations; while
inability to repay loans can result in usurious interest rates or
seizure of collateral. At a higher level, someone might be ostracized
within the chama or even cast out of it, and these repercussions can
also be mirrored in the larger community. Accountability is harder to
ensure for a Chatham House rule group because a violation is most likely
to happen after the group breaks up, which means that ostracization
within the larger community is the only real repercussion. Finally, RWOT
maintains accountability primarily through light counseling on the one
end and the possibility of forced exit on the other. (More generally,
it’s a case where clearly defined Purpose and Conduct largely obviate
the need for Accountability.)

10/ Membrane
------------

A group always constructs a protective barrier around it to define who
is in the group and who is outside. We term this barrier a membrane. It
acts as a control to both the Consensual Entry and the Freedom to Exit
the group, but it can also more subtlety act as a filter for other
elements trying to enter or leave the group, such as information.

In Chamas, the membrane protects the community against the corruption
around it; by choosing trusted peoples, the members of the Chama
purposefully create a different environment than that which surrounds
them. The membrane can also protect the financial plans of the chama,
which they wouldn’t want revealed to competitors. In the Chatham Rule,
the membrane very explicitly protects information: identifiable
information (hopefully) doesn’t pass through the membrane. RWOT offers a
more subtle example of a membrane: a group isolates itself from others
mainly to preserve their attention and to keep the chaos of the much
larger organization from infiltrating their group.

Preserving these principles represents more a stake in the ground than a
first principles thesis of philosophy.

Polycentrism
------------

An individual cannot meet these principles, and individuals working
together struggle to maintain consistent adherence to them. Groups can
do this, but groups face their own problems; drifting purpose, takeover,
inept accountability, exclusion from within and corruption. Many of
these issues become worse at scale, indeed it is hard to see how a
large-scale organisation can preserve the principles on behalf of all
the users instead of to the benefit of itself: shareholder value, this
year’s bonus, don’t be evil.

Groups then have limits to scale and tend to either metastasize
(cancer), to undergo mitosis (fork!) or be eaten.

Forking is perhaps the best result amongst the many painful outcomes of
a dynamic, real society. If groups cannot scale, they can fork, which
perhaps we should celebrate.

Indeed, maybe the decentralised network is a cooperation of many groups
rather than an anarchy of individuals. An alternate to the dichotomy of
centrism versus decentralisation is polycentrism: many small groups
working together but living apart.

There is no scaling limit to the number of groups, but the linkage
between groups then becomes critical. More and more powerful links makes
for a more powerful community of groups. This opportunity is for several
of the principles to be implemented with polycentrism in mind: the group
preserves the privacy of the members, but the membrane allows useful
edges to form between groups.

The trade-off between protecting the individual and fulfilling the
purpose of a group is an evolving dynamic that polycentrism supports.
Solidifying the purpose of a group reduces the freedom of the individual
but increases the productivity of the group. Decentralisation enables
the individual to seek out new possibilities through freedom of exit to
join other groups or create their own. This trade-off between a
participant’s need for productive function vs freedom of choice is
supported by the idea of dynamic polycentrism - a decentralised network
of communities.

\[maybe the edges become the focal point - construction the group to
provide good edge potential?\]

\[the war of the \*centrisms\]

\[as an embodiment of the principles\]

\[limitations of centralisation/decentralisation\]

\[local centralisation and global decentralisation\]

\[enabling decentralisation but not forcing it\]

\[Polycentrism is the conclusion not the start of this section\]

Rigidity vs possibility

Conversation+collaboration without directional discussion

Providing the capabilities and safety afforded to members of centralized
structures to arbitrarily small agents in decentralized networks enables
organizations with less existential threat and greater receptiveness to
complexity.

Design
------

We envision a network as being created by individuals based on their
interests and needs.

Things

-   -   Meeting

-   Ways to Ban & Methods for Entry

-   Skin in the Game: bond? Reputation? Real life meeting? Supported by
    > voting?

    -   \[big problem\]

-   Incentives

HOW TO SUPPORT WITH DECENTRALIZED ID:

-   A group could have capabilities which define its purpose and conduct

    -   Is this too much technification?

-   Peer to peer communication, Group communication, and Group voting
    > could support inclusion and mutuality

    -   Need Sybil-less identities for voting to work

    -   Voting systems as a milestone of success in decentralised
        > identifiers

-   Link up these groups, so that identifier is not captured by a single
    > group, but is available to be portable among them

-   Privacy

    -   You can mask what’s being done inside from people outside: you
        > mask the identifier to everyone outside

    -   You could equally mask who is doing an action within a community
        > to the participants only being seen by each other or by people
        > within a subgroup

    -   \[CT, CA show how to do this in Bitcoin\]

-   Consensual Entry, Freedom of Consensual Exit

    -   There are COSTS here

    -   Entry is by Vote?

    -   For exit, for example, we have the skin the game costs (below)

    -   (But can you exit if you could break the rules afterward? Do you
        > automatically incur cost? Do you allow consensual exit if they
        > agree not to?)

    -   EXIT = pay cost OR accept vote

-   We need systems that support **skin in the game**, which in turn
    > support voting and the ability to force exit

    -   The most obvious way is to force uniqueness of personhood of
        > identifier (Reputation)

    -   The other obvious way is money (Finances) (More generally:
        > resources/capital)(collateral)

    -   The thing is Skin in game is meant to be problematic

    -   Secrets that could be publicized

    -   Judicial threats \[identities that go to real people\]

    -   Graduated Rights (Apprenticeship: Reputation within a Community)

    -   ***CONCLUSION: identifiers can’t just be disposable!***

-   Incentives / Accountability

    -   

Things to Flag That Are Important, and Aren’t Necessarily Technical:

-   Purpose

-   Conduct

\[Abstract description of community building to support principles\]

\[Identify an identity framework to facilitate aforementioned
polycentrism\]

Polycentric: interoperable, easily able to enter and leave

\[kind of a middle ground\]

\[want to be able to fork communities\]

\[reside in multiple communities\]

\[we want to create possibilities, and show how this is beneficial\]

\[this is how we reformulate the principles for an online environment\]

Conduct -&gt; Code

A relationship and a network of relationships are generally tied to a
context. This context forms a powerful set of limitations on any design.
We assume the following:

1.  One Network. A context is assumed to be consistent and preserved
    > within one single network with a set of rules. As soon as there
    > are two networks, the rules and norms are assumed to be somewhat
    > different between the two; else they are the same network in some
    > sense.

2.  One Purpose. This is a simplification and an observation - the
    > purpose of most networks is singular, including where it can be a
    > single set of

3.  Code of Conduct. To create a shared view on productive conduct, some
    > behaviours are translated into a *code of conduct*, being a
    > written document that is accepted by the whole community. Such a
    > code of conduct typically lists the headline purpose, exhortations
    > and expectations of good behaviour, methods of dispute resolution
    > and the possible punishments that can be levied to members that do
    > not follow the code.

Open questions

**Section: Collaborative Communities**

Discuss the mechanics of traditional and digital communities built for
certain purposes. How do people identify each other and how does that
affect collaboration? What do we want to from collaboration and what do
we define as good behaviour?

**Section: Desired Identity Properties**

Discuss what the desired characteristics and properties an identity
framework would need. How do we define an identity for its application?

**Section: Applying Identity to Decentralised Communities**

Discuss how to build an identity framework in the context of
decentralised networks.

**Section: Law, Regulators and Norms**

Many law … much lawyer.

A group seeks to pursue its purpose without interference

DIDs and DID-NOTs?

When faced with a conflict between the good for the individual and the
good for the community, which should we prioritise? E.g., if a hacker
can demand information about the hack be removed pursuant to the GDPR,
the individual is being prioritised over the collective.

Conclusion
----------

Things to bring out in the Conclusion:

-   ***Decentralisation isn’t the goal - polycentrism is (or somet***

-   ***identifiers can’t just be disposable!***

-   

Appendix: Elinor Ostrom’s Design Principles
-------------------------------------------

Nobel laureate Elinor Ostrom in her 1990 book *Governing the Commons*
identified a set eight design principles used by successful communities
for governing common pool resources. To provide a check on the design
principles identified in this paper, we compare them to Ostrom
principles.

Elinor Ostrom’s principles were developed by studying x\# of successful
efforts to manage common pool resources. Common pool resource systems --
like fisheries, grazing pastures, …, -- combine aspects of public and
private goods. Traditional solutions for pure public goods (states) or
pure private goods (markets) The resource system is public (the lake)
but the resource units (the fish) are rivalrous. What she found is that
communities can in many cases successfully self-organize governance
systems that can successfully manage common pool resources.

The slightly revised list of principles taken from her (2010) Nobel
prize lecture, “Beyond Markets and States: Polycentric Governance of
Complex Economic”

> 1/ Boundaries
>
> a/ User Boundaries: Clear and locally understood boundaries between
> legitimate users and nonusers are present.
>
> b/ Resource Boundaries: Clear boundaries that separate specific
> common-pool resource from a larger social-ecological system are
> present.
>
> 2/ Congruence:
>
> a/ Congruence with Local Conditions: Appropriation and provision rules
> are congruent with local social and environmental conditions.
>
> b/ Congruence between Appropriation and Provision: Appropriation rules
> are congruent with provision rules; the distribution of costs is
> proportional to the distribution of benefits.
>
> 3/ Collective-Choice Arrangements: Most individuals affected by a
> resource regime are authorized to participate in making and modifying
> its rules.
>
> 4/ Monitoring
>
> a/ Monitoring Users: Individuals who are accountable to or are the
> users monitor the appropriation and provision level of users.
>
> b/ Monitoring the Resource: Individuals who are accountable to or are
> the users monitor the condition of the resource.
>
> 5/ Graduated Sanctions: Sanctions for rule violation start very low
> but become stronger if a user repeatedly violates a rule.
>
> 6/ Conflict-Resolution Mechanisms: Rapid, low-cost, local arenas exist
> for resolving conflicts among users or with officials.
>
> 7/ Minimal Recognition of Rights: The rights of local users to make
> their own rules are recognized by the government.
>
> 8/ Nested Enterprises: When a common-pool resource is closely
> connected to a larger social-ecological system, governance activities
> are organized in multiple nested layers.

  **Ostrom**            **Us**
  --------------------- -------------------------------------
  Boundaries            Membrane; Voluntarism: Exit & Entry
  Congruence            Conduct, Purpose
  Collective Choice     Inclusion, Mutuality
  Monitoring            Accountability
  Graduated Sanctions   Incentives
  Conflict Resolution   Inclusion, Mutuality
  Self-Governance       Skin in the Game
  Nested Enterprise     Polycentrism
                        Privacy

Ostrom’s concept has similarities to our concept membranes, but is
focused on mainly on exclusion - protecting communities from outside
interference. Membranes emphasizes selective transport across boundaries
in both directions. In addition, her design principles don’t address
exit and entry across boundaries (although this addressed elsewhere in
her work.)

Ostrom’s concept of congruence does not have an obvious counterpart in
our system. This is due in part to the specific nature of common pool
resources, but it also suggests a potential blind spot. Perhaps, related
to congruence are our concepts of purpose and conduct. The rules of
conduct of the community need to be congruent with the community’s
purpose.

Ostrom’s concepts of collective choice and dispute resolution relates to
our concepts of voice and mutuality. Collective choice mechanisms to
determine community rules, along with dispute resolution for dealing
with potential violations of those rules are aspects of voice. The
principle of mutuality sets bounds on those mechanisms to ensure that
they respect individual autonomy and avoid, as much as possible, power
asymmetries.

Ostrom’s concept of monitoring can be seen as one aspect of
accountability. In common pool resources where extractable resource
units are scarce, and overuse of the resource system can lead to its
destruction, monitoring compliance with rules by monitoring the actions
of users and the state of the resource are important function. More
generally, members of a community need to be accountable to the other
members and to the community’s purpose.

Graduated sanctions are also identifiable in uses case we examine. They
can be seen as one type of incentive system. The principle that these
sanctions be graduated is an important aspect, especially in systems
where banishment from the system imposes high costs on the banished.

Ostrom’s seventh principle, the minimal recognition of rights -
specifically, that the rights of local users to make their own rules are
recognized by the government - can perhaps be rephrased, in our context
as self-governance. Although his touches on several of our principles
such voice and mutuality, it relates directly to the importance of
having skin in the game.

Ostrom’s final concept, nested enterprise, recognizes that specific
communities may be parts of larger communities in resource systems. This
is something that we don’t specifically address, rather we pick up on
the notion of polycentric systems, also emphasized by Ostrom.

Interestingly, privacy is a principle identified by us that does not
seem to have an obvious counterpart in Ostrom. This may in part be due
to the specific challenges of managing common pool resources which
differ from the challenges we face in protecting the digital person
online.

### Resource ideas / possible inspiration

Human Systems Curriculum -
[*https://medium.com/what-to-build*](https://medium.com/what-to-build)

Patterns of Decentralized Organizing -
[*https://docs.wixstatic.com/ugd/8246de\_248a47ddbd3c4d209667ff5508ee300b.pdf*](https://docs.wixstatic.com/ugd/8246de_248a47ddbd3c4d209667ff5508ee300b.pdf)

Microsolidarity -
[*https://medium.com/enspiral-tales/courage-before-hope-a-proposal-to-weave-emotional-and-economic-microsolidarity-87bc81372a09*](https://medium.com/enspiral-tales/courage-before-hope-a-proposal-to-weave-emotional-and-economic-microsolidarity-87bc81372a09)
