# Verifiable Claims for Postal Addresses: A Use Case for Decentralized Postal Services using DIDs, VCs and Blockchains

### By Moses MA

_Submitted to the 8th Rebooting the Web of Trust Technical Workshop •
March 1-3, 2019, Barcelona_

***Keywords:*** decentralization, postal services, verified claims,
identity, blockchain, decentralized, self-sovereign

**PROPOSAL**

This is a proposal to facilitate the collaborative drafting of a
technical paper that describes the principles and key design
considerations for a use case for verifiable physical address claims.
Individuals within the global postal network now seek to understand the
“decentralization revolution” and help to develop game-changing,
blockchain-powered new business models for the world. We believe that
the active endorsement, support and participation of the global postal
industry could provide a tipping point for adoption of DIDs and VCs.
This is a first step toward that desired future.

We base much of our work on key design considerations for decentralized
identity, claims and reputation, developed by C. Allen, M. Sporny, D.
Reed, and many others (see references), at previous RWOT design
conferences.

**BACKGROUND**

The Decentralized ID movement offers a rare and unique opportunity to
fix certain deep, systemic flaws in the methods that currently manage
online identity, which has caused significant global issues based on
surveillance capitalism and the generation of intelligent, targetable,
weaponized propaganda. It offers a next step beyond user-centric
identity by offering true user control over digital identity, offering
robust and meaningful user autonomy. This means control, not just
consent, and thus can offer a smooth path to transportable
self-sovereign identity services and resources.

The goal is to implement a rapid entry for postal authorities into
blockchain enabled decentralized identity efforts. This is mean to both
strengthen postal industry efforts to address the emerging web of trust,
as well as strengthen emerging standards and efforts such as
Decentralized Identity, Verifiable Claims, identity.foundation, and
others.

**APPLICATION TO POSTAL SERVICES**

Self-sovereign identity adheres to a series of guiding principles —
which are meant to ensure the user controls their identity related data.
Identity data is a double-edged sword — usable for both positive and
negative purposes. Thus, an identity system must balance transparency,
fairness, and support of the commons with protection for the individual.
These principles are:

-   *Personhood*. Users must have an independent existence. Any
    self-sovereign identity is ultimately based on the ineffable “I”
    that’s at the heart of identity. It can never exist wholly in
    digital form. A self-sovereign identity simply makes public and
    accessible some limited aspects of the “I” that already exists.

-   *Control*. Users must be able to control their identities. Subject
    to well-understood and secure algorithms that ensure the continued
    validity of an identity and its claims, the user is the ultimate
    authority on their identity. They should always be able to refer to
    it, update it, or even hide it. They must be able to choose
    celebrity or privacy as they prefer.

-   *Access*. Users must have access to their own identity-related data.
    A user must always be able to retrieve all the claims and other data
    within his identity. There must be no hidden data and be able to
    operate without gatekeepers. This does not mean that a user can
    necessarily modify all the claims associated with his identity, but
    it does mean they should be aware of them.

-   *Transparency*. Systems and algorithms must be transparent. The
    systems used to administer and operate a network of identities must
    be open, both in how they function and in how they are managed
    and updated. The algorithms should be free, open-source, well-known,
    and as independent as possible of any particular architecture;
    anyone should be able to examine how they work.

-   *Persistence*. Identities must be long-lived. Preferably, identities
    should last forever, or at least for as long as the user wishes.
    This must not contradict a “right to be forgotten”; a user should be
    able to dispose of an identity if he wishes and claims should be
    modified or removed as appropriate over time. To do this requires a
    firm separation between an identity and its claims: they can't be
    tied forever.

-   *Portability*. Information and services about identity must
    be transportable. Identities must not be held by a singular
    third-party entity, even if it's a trusted entity that is expected
    to work in the best interest of the user. The problem is that
    entities can disappear — and on the Internet, most eventually do.
    Regimes may change, users may move to different jurisdictions.
    Transportable identities ensure that the user remains in control of
    his identity no matter what, and can also improve an identity’s
    persistence over time.

-   *Interoperability*. Identities should be as widely usable
    as possible. Identities are of little value if they only work in
    limited niches. The goal of a 21st-century digital identity system
    is to make identity information widely available, crossing
    international boundaries to create global identities, without losing
    user control.

-   *Consent*. Users must agree to the use of their identity. Any
    identity system is built around sharing that identity and its
    claims, and an interoperable system increases the amount of sharing
    that occurs. However, sharing of data must only occur with the
    consent of the user. Though other users such as an employer, a
    credit bureau, or a friend might present claims, the user must still
    offer consent for them to become valid.

-   *Minimalization*. Disclosure of claims must be minimized. When data
    is disclosed, that disclosure should involve the minimum amount of
    data necessary to accomplish the task at hand. For example, if only
    a minimum age is called for, then the exact age should not be
    disclosed, and if only an age is requested, then the more precise
    date of birth should not be disclosed. This principle can be
    supported with selective disclosure, range proofs, and other
    zero-knowledge techniques, but non-correlatibility is still a very
    hard; the best we can do is to use minimalization to support privacy
    as best as possible.

-   *Protection*. The rights of users must be protected. When there is a
    conflict between the needs of the identity network and the rights of
    individual users, then the network should err on the side of
    preserving the freedoms and rights of the individuals over the needs
    of the network. To ensure this, authentication must occur through
    algorithms that are censorship-resistant and force-resilient and
    that are run in a decentralized manner.

The current embodiment of these principles – which are essentially in
alignment with postal industry principles – is being encoded into
something called the “Decentralized Identity specification” (DID is the
acronym for the decentralized identifier). The DID spec is now being
developed a working group at the World Wide Web Consortium, known as the
Credentials Community Group. DIDs provide a way for individuals and
organizations to create permanent, globally unique, verifiable
identifiers that are entirely under the identity owner’s control. Unlike
a domain name, IP address, or phone number, a DID is not rented from any
service provider, and no one can take it away from whomever owns or
controls the associated private key. DIDs are the first globally unique
verifiable identifiers that require no registration authority.

We believe that technical cooperation with the DID community will help
the postal industry achieve its strategic objectives. Use of blockchain
technology can also help to reduce the "postal divide" between
industrialized and developing countries and enables the transfer of
know-how.

And so, some of the next step/deliverables we hope to develop during the
workshop include:

1.  Develop an understanding for how DIDs and verifiable claims would
    interoperate with postal services

2.  Create a user persona for a typical postal services user to analyze
    tacit needs

3.  Develop a detailed use case for a “postal address” verifiable claim

4.  Develop knowledge about the use of DID within a reference
    application for financial inclusion

5.  Understand social/network interaction functionality between
    stakeholders and users to map out downstream functionality

6.  Develop a pilot development plan (PDP) for the postal industry: a
    strategy document setting out the pilot implementation of technical
    cooperation activities

7.  Discuss requirements for a multi-year integrated project (MIP)
    covering expertise, purchase of equipment and training in this arena

8.  Open discussion on other issues related to this effort

**WHY THIS MATTERS**

Imagine a world where decentralized technology has been deployed and
globally adopted. Let us paint a picture for how this might be achieved.
Imagine that this approach becomes part of a decentralized identity
solution, driven by a robust and active developer community. The systems
and functional resources produced would be integrated into postal
services that are used in e-commerce, social interaction, low cost
banking, healthcare, and so on. Now imagine that mobile telephony
companies agree to embed the technology into the operating systems for
all smartphones, and the dominant networks – from social to logistics to
financial services – agree to use postal APIs in their algorithms for
driving their applications.

This could mean that the postal industry could participate in the
beginning of new era for society built on an interconnecting web of
trust. This will enable a Cambrian explosion of postal services that
will empower e-commerce, financial services, logistics and shipping, and
many other areas. It also could mean the end of phishing. The end of
spam. All of this is possible via the creation of decentralized trust
systems. Therefore, we seek to develop knowledge and expertise in the
cost effective integration of blockchain and decentralization
technologies to strengthen the applications and offerings or postal
organizations, to explore financial inclusion strategies and
technologies; to explore and pilot cost effective exploration of
advanced technologies to benefit the postal industry.

And so, our goal for this working paper is to map out functionality for
such a system. We wish to co-author, with members of the Rebooting the
Web of Trust community, a position paper that seeks to address these
these and related challenges and to produce meaningful solutions.

**REFERENCES**

1.  https://github.com/WebOfTrustInfo/rebooting-the-web-of-trust-fall2017/blob/master/topics-and-advance-readings/did-primer.md


