**Exploring Sustainable Technology Commons using Appreciative Inquiry**

Version 1.2: For Final Submission

Rebooting Web of Trust 6

Santa Barbara, March 6-8, 2018

Wordcount: 2675

***Lead Author***

Heather Vescent (heathervescent@gmail.com)

***Authors***

Kaliya “Identity Woman” Young (kaliya@identitywoman.net)

Adrian Gropper (Agropper@healthurl.com)

Juan Caballero (juanxcaballero@gmail.com)

**Keywords**: Commons, Technology Commons, Open Source, Technology
Standards, Market Externalities, Sustainable Capitalism, Technology
Infrastructure, Economics

**Introduction**

Technology Commons are critical for the development of technology that
is used across platforms, companies, and industries. In the internet
age, corporations structured around monetizing defensible intellectual
property frequently utilize common technology to produce innovative
products that work across shared infrastructure, including most of the
core platforms and building blocks of what we know as the internet
industry. These technology commons include the Internet and the
standards that make it run. There are several standards bodies that
support the development of these standards, primarily the IETF, W3C, and
OASIS.

The W3C defined web standards that could be used by everyone (including
companies, individuals, nonprofits, governments) for the creation of the
web. As one common saying summarized the thinking of the early 00s,
“Nobody owns it, everyone can use it, and everyone can improve it.”

Technology commons come in a variety of flavors and have achieved
varying levels of financial success. For-profit corporate activities
have in few historical cases been set up with a financial feedback
mechanism to support the commons upon which they depend and capitalize.
Why do the commons and the technology sectors’ available forms of
capitalism act as incompatible as oil and water, even though they
support each other’s aims? When capitalist benefactors support the
technology commons that they utilize, it creates a sustainable and
thriving commons which enables and supports additional capitalistic
technology innovation.

Having worked on both sides of the equation, the authors of this piece
propose a vocabulary to nourish these interactions between the two
sides; identified characteristics of a sustainable technology commons;
identified commons models and variations; applied Appreciative Inquiry
principles to one commons model; and identified future research areas.

**What is a Technology Commons?**

We identified four characteristics of sustainable technology commons.
These characteristics grow in an atmosphere of identity and autonomy,
yet the pressures of interfacing with existing systems (data systems but
also systems of intellectual property and/or social control and capital
capture) make them feel like distant abstractions in 2018.

-   **Re-decentralization:** this term names the reverse trend away from
    our current web ecosystem driven by privacy-poor, capital-rich
    big-data players and towards decentralized forms of the Web, ideally
    via self-sovereign technology that distributes data power and
    governance downward. It is the counter-trend to centralized web
    services successfully deployed by a few massively powerful
    corporations (e.g. Google, Amazon), and is often construed in
    cultural and ideological terms as a return towards the attitude of
    the early internet.
-   **Sustainable Capitalism:** sustainable technologies foster
    sustainable forms of capitalism and intellectual property. These
    forms consider economic externalities and end-to-end infrastructural
    costs and include them in their calculations of market ROI. They
    protect the standards process from financial influence (regulatory
    capture), while leveraging market diversity/competition and
    production, without harming the commons.
-   **Infrastructure:** elaborating on the last point, these
    interactions of capital and the common good would need to treat
    specifications and protocols as a public infrastructure, and thus
    consider all web users as sovereign stakeholders. By this analogy,
    internet and other information technology protocols are similar to
    roads and other essential infrastructure that is used by many
    entities and people.
-   **Human Dignity:** protecting privacy and self-sovereignty are an
    information protocol’s duty to human dignity, as many aspects of
    individual and family health, property rights, and political
    participation hinge upon privacy and control over one’s own data in
    ways both culturally-specific and protected by international law.
    Much as economic externalities have been excluded from the economic
    calculus of private corporations operating on a broader public, so
    too have the rights of individuals fallen neatly outside the ethical
    consideration of technological projects scoped only by their direct
    litigative and regulatory obligations, typically referred to as
    compliance.

To understand what works in the real world, we identified existing
technology commons in which we participate firsthand and applied a form
of Appreciative Inquiry. We have tried to apply terminology consistent
with Christopher Allen’s adaptation of Nobel Laureate Elinor Ostrom's “8
principles of Commons Governance” as spelled out in his succinct 2015
blog post, available
[*here*](http://www.lifewithalacrity.com/2015/11/a-revised-ostroms-design-principles-for-collective-governance-of-the-commons-.html).

**Current Technology Commons Models**

Commons are many and vary in the models that they apply, how they are
used, and who uses them. The authors identified multiple commons and
commons-adjacent models of IT development and variations within those
models used to build/design trust systems and protocols.

**Ad-hoc Technology R&D:** Like-minded people organically create
communities to explore new technology. These communities can start
inside another community or due to the death of a community. The
Internet Identity Workshop (IIW) and Rebooting Web of Trust (RWoT) are
two examples of community-created technology commons. IIW in particular
has been a spawning ground for new protocols, incubating ongoing work
and the formation of associations for the general benefit of the broad
digital identity space.

The boundaries and technology ownership in these communities are often
vague and there tends to be less corporate control of products created
within the community. Participants tend to be early adopters exploring
the bleeding edge of new technology. Participants may come from company
technology divisions, however they are rarely expected by their
employers to return significant economic benefit.

We identified the following variations to this base model. Variations
are not mutually exclusive:

-   Benevolent Dictator: one or a small number of primary organizer(s)
    take(s) the main leadership role, primarily for altruistic,
    ideological, or other non-monetary motivation.
-   Do-Ocracy: a peer to peer volunteerism model, where the people doing
    the work make the decisions, often in a very ad hoc or
    social/informal governance model.
-   Blockchain and Fat Protocols: a new model that structures ownership
    and governance of a project around a central ledger. One key trait
    of this model is the potential to issue residual payments and
    governance to contributors over time, independent of traditional
    employment or stock ownership; theoretically, this could include
    sending residuals back to a commons or collective contributor
    post-factum.

*Examples:* RWoT, IIW, Digital Life Collective, other public
blockchains.

**Open Standards:** Open standards are the development of approved
standards that are open and available to the public. They can be thought
of as public infrastructure. Regulators enforce regulations and depend
on industries to write the standards to support the regulations.
Regulatory capture can occur when the people writing the standards hold
regulators hostage to use their standards.

An example of regulatory capture can be seen in health records
interoperability. Health records themselves are specific to the health
vertical and need to be developed by healthcare industry incumbents.
Patient and physician identity and authorization protocols however are
not specific to the healthcare industry and could be left to others.
This, however reduces the market power of the healthcare incumbents so
they prefer to reinvent or “enhance” authentication and authorization
standards to raise the barrier to entry.

We believe involving multiple stakeholders in the standards process can
help address this issue; however in the end only implementers, typically
industry, can create useful standards. Layered (scope-specific)
standards are more resistant to the corrosive influence of regulatory
capture. This is a problem in healthcare and other verticals where
commerce is not built on mostly open-source technologies.

Another problem occurs when these standard groups ignore history and the
experience of adjacent groups activities, mainly due to interpersonal
power dynamics and differing objectives.

*Examples:* Open-stand.org, Internet Engineering Task Force, HTML, IP,
TCP.

*Regulatory capture example:* HL7 mixing data model and authorization to
lock out innovation based on non-healthcare standards like UMA
(User-Managed Access).

**Government Funded R&D:** The U.S. government has a history of
investing in new technology standards to support a diverse and
competitive marketplace. One goal of these investments is to support the
development of interoperable technology and technology standards that
otherwise would not be developed by competitive corners of the free
market.

*Examples:* DHS S&T Investments: Digital Bazaar/VeresOne,
Evernym/Sovrin, Open Whisper Systems (Signal protocol), Tor.

**Open Source:** It has been argued that open-source code bases in
practice are often driven by and structured to maximize how large
companies benefit from sharing one large code base for core
infrastructure elements. Prominent examples include the Apache Web
Server (which serves over 90% of the conventional web at time of press)
and the Linux Operating System Almost all large web and tech firms
significantly reduce their costs by sharing infrastructural code with
each other while competing at the edges of the product. For example,
companies like IBM sell their own Web Servers based on Apache. This
dual-licensing model (partly proprietary, partly open) enabled by
BSD-style licenses uses proprietary licensing fees to pay back into
open-source development costs. A common pattern is that companies pay a
developer’s salary while they work full time on the open-source code
base that has applications for its own proprietary business model.

For projects with less obvious proprietary/monetizable applications, the
open-source model has had more limited economic success. The question
remains: how to compensate developers who are not working for a large
company that leverages the open-source code base.

*Examples:* Linux, Apache, Drupal, WordPress.

**Commons-Adjacent Business Models**

In addition to true commons models, we identified a variety of
for-profit models that are “commons-adjacent”.

**Corporate Non-Profit (e.g. SWIFT), Corporate Co-Op (variation):** A
top-down approach, this is a model where a non-profit representing a
consortium of corporate interests is created to solve common technology
and/or informational infrastructure problems for the benefit of member
organizations. This closed process produces standards that may or may
not be open when finalized. The jointly-developed technology can also be
licensed or sold on a for- profit basis for the benefit of the
consortium companies.

While sharing infrastructure costs, these entities may find themselves
starved of resources or limited in their ability to explore new
technology solutions due to political goals of stakeholder companies
(that generally drive resource allocation and development timelines)
without much consideration for other stakeholders like end-users and
regulatory bodies.

*Examples:* Swift, CableLabs.

**Closed Technology:** A company develops technology to be used by
others but is restrictive as to how and who can use it. This is
generally seen as a negative in the tech world but one of the most
successful software platforms — the Apple App Store — utilizes this.
This enables Apple to have complete control over what third party
applications are allowed and distributed through their platform,
retaining the power to revoke and remove that app from previous
installations on their hardware. Because Apple owns the hardware and
software they are able to retain this power while opening up the
platform to developers who follow their rules.

*Example:* Apple App Store

**Appreciative Inquiry on Ad-hoc Technology Models**

To understand the positive effects of existing technology commons, we
applied Appreciative Inquiry Principles. We limited the scope of this
paper to fit into RWoT time, focusing our area of inquiry on the ad-hoc
technology R&D community model. Using RWoT, IIW, and Digital Life
Collective as examples, we selected the positive aspects across these
instances.

While we worked from a limited set of examples, the authors have deep
knowledge about them due to the longevity of the events and author
participation. We use this starting point as a basis for our inquiry and
invite others to build upon it.

**Appreciative Inquiry Principles**

We utilized the five principles for each example.

1.  The **Constructivist Principle** is the rule that we see the world
    as we are: our interior state, our mores, values, and experiences
    create the lens through which we view the world.
2.  The **Poetic Principle** says what we focus on grows.
3.  The **Simultaneity Principle** is the rule that when we ask
    questions we have already begun to change. We like to think of this
    as change in-flight. Change doesn’t happen in a vacuum or only in a
    certain segment of a process. Change is happening all the time, at
    any stage of the process. How is your participation changing you
    right now?
4.  The **Anticipatory Principle** is the rule that what we believe, we
    conceive.
5.  The **Positive Principle** is where we identify and leverage
    strengths. We like to remember the successes we have already
    experienced as part of history.


|  **Appreciative Inquiry Model**   |                                      **RWoT:** workshop focused on co-developing technology papers                       |  **IIW:** unconference for User Centric Digital Identity                                     | **DigiLife:** community building technology with decentralized web values
|--|--|--|--|
| **Constructivist Principle**: we see the world as we are | Focused on outcomes, developing ideas. | A space for signals about digital identity to be voiced/named.<br><br>Grassroots.<br><br>Sustainable business model (with no exit).|Create governance that assigns resources, investments, tracks reputation and credit, using ledgers instead of money itself. |
| **Poetic Principle:** what we focus on grows | Developing ideas. Deliverables: Specs, Papers, Prototype examples.<br><br>Making the community sustainable.|Exploring the edge of what is possible in digital identity with the technology available.|Sustainable capitalism and IP.<br>Growing resources / membership to fund and build the technology.|
|**Simultaneity Principle:** the questions we ask cause us to change.|How can we be more sustainable?|What comes after federation?<br><br>What is new? What is emerging? What new technology and ideas gives the community energy?|What are our new models of capitalization? How can new models be found?|
|**Anticipatory Principle:** what we believe, we conceive.|By working together, we can do it better and each of us can individually benefit.|Participants learn something new. <br><br>It’s always going to be around.<br><br>Low barrier for entry/participation.|Capitalism will not create technology we trust. We have to create it cooperatively.|
|**Positive Principle:** identify and leverage strengths.|Things are happening, people are working, we are moving the spec forward together.|Huge community.<br><br>Amplifies ideas developing on the edges.<br><br>Has longevity and sustainability.<br><br>IIW gives space to others for disparate agendas.|Review and vet new technology. <br><br>Build bridges across nascent technologies.|

The three examples are similar in that each group actively explores the
bleeding edge of their chosen topic through an open community. However,
the groups utilizes different governance models, have different
community longevity, and focus on different outcomes.

**Areas for Further Research**

The initial RWOT topic paper proposed to apply AI to all commons models.
However to keep our work in scope with the time available at RWOT, we
applied AI to the ad hoc technology common models. We identify the
following four areas for follow-up inquiry.

1.  Identify a feature set for technology rooted in a sustainable
    commons.\
    Once we understand the characteristics of a sustainable technology
    commons, we can draft a set of requirements or use cases that
    identity technology may be able to “solve” and sustain.

1.  Apply Appreciative Inquiry on more of the identified commons models
    (identified in Part 2).

1.  Apply Appreciative Inquiry on RWoT’s Self-sovereign Identity
    architecture as it is currently being conceived and planned. At IIW
    in April 2018, a session exploring Self-sovereign Identity was held
    and a link to notes is in the Bibliography.

1.  Explore artificial intelligence as a technology method for the
    identification and measurement of market externalities.

**Bibliography**

-   The Internet’s Three Virtues by Doc Searls and David Weinberger

    -   [*http://worldofends.com/\#BM\_8*](http://worldofends.com/#BM_8)

-   Economic History of the Open Source movement

    -   [*https://www.amazon.com/Success-Open-Source-Steven-Weber/dp/0674018583*](https://www.amazon.com/Success-Open-Source-Steven-Weber/dp/0674018583)

-   Protocol (Open Standards &gt; Open Source)

    -   [*https://www.amazon.com/Protocol-Control-Exists-Decentralization-Leonardo/dp/0262572338/ref=sr\_1\_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1520380967&sr=8-1&keywords=protocol+control+decentralization*](https://www.amazon.com/Protocol-Control-Exists-Decentralization-Leonardo/dp/0262572338/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1520380967&sr=8-1&keywords=protocol+control+decentralization)

-   Sustainable/anti-corporate business models

    -   [*https://www.amazon.com/Good-News-Change-Everyday-Helping/dp/155054926X/ref=sr\_1\_2?ie=UTF8&qid=1520381113&sr=8-2&keywords=good+news+for+a+change*](https://www.amazon.com/Good-News-Change-Everyday-Helping/dp/155054926X/ref=sr_1_2?ie=UTF8&qid=1520381113&sr=8-2&keywords=good+news+for+a+change)

-   Do-ocracy (Anarchist co-ops)

    -   [*http://www.heathervescent.com/heathervescent/2007/04/doocracy.html*](http://www.heathervescent.com/heathervescent/2007/04/doocracy.html)

    -   [*http://www.heathervescent.com/heathervescent/2007/11/shes-geeky-sess.html*](http://www.heathervescent.com/heathervescent/2007/11/shes-geeky-sess.html)

    -   [*http://www.heathervescent.com/heathervescent/2008/01/good-article-on.html*](http://www.heathervescent.com/heathervescent/2008/01/good-article-on.html)

-   On Govt Funded R&D: America by Design

    -   [*https://www.amazon.com/America-Design-Technology-Corporate-Capitalism/dp/0195026187/*](https://www.amazon.com/America-Design-Technology-Corporate-Capitalism/dp/0195026187/)

-   Christopher Allen’s blog post about Commons Governance Models

    -   [*http://www.lifewithalacrity.com/2015/11/a-revised-ostroms-design-principles-for-collective-governance-of-the-commons-.html*](http://www.lifewithalacrity.com/2015/11/a-revised-ostroms-design-principles-for-collective-governance-of-the-commons-.html)

-   Fat Protocols

    -   [*http://www.usv.com/blog/fat-protocols*](http://www.usv.com/blog/fat-protocols)

-   Ethereum Commons

    -   [*https://medium.com/@RhysLindmark/co-evolving-the-phase-shift-to-cryptocapitalism-by-founding-the-ethereum-commons-co-op-f4771e5f0c83*](https://medium.com/@RhysLindmark/co-evolving-the-phase-shift-to-cryptocapitalism-by-founding-the-ethereum-commons-co-op-f4771e5f0c83)

-   An Analysis of Self Sovereign Identity using Appreciative Inquiry,
    IIW April 2018

    -   [*https://www.slideshare.net/heathervescent/selfsovereign-identity-an-analysis-using-appreciative-inquiry*](https://www.slideshare.net/heathervescent/selfsovereign-identity-an-analysis-using-appreciative-inquiry)


