# Self-Sovereign Compliance: Use case for DIDs and VCs in decentralized capital formation

## Presented by Moses Ma, FutureLab

### Submitted to the 6th Rebooting the Web of Trust Technical Workshop as a discussion paper

### Santa Barbara, March 25-26, 2018

***Keywords:*** reputation, trust, verified claims, collaboration,
innovation, framework, blockchain, decentralized, self-sovereign,
capital formation, ICO

**PROPOSAL**

We propose to facilitate the collaborative drafting of a technical paper
that describes the principles and key design considerations for a use
case that utilizes Decentralized IDs and Verifiable Claims to implement
self-auditable, self-sovereign compliance for capital market investors.
We will also describe other issues, including downstream functionality,
user centric needs analysis and cognitive models, ROI for digital
compliance, the the potential use of incentive tokens to economically
drive the eco-system.

We base much of our work on key design considerations for decentralized
identity, claims and reputation, developed by C. Allen, M. Sporny, D.
Reed, and many others (see references), at previous RWOT design
conferences.

**BACKGROUND**

Here’s the central idea: *identity on the Internet is broken.* Not just
a little broken, but *seriously* broken. Because identity is currently
built in a less than optimal way, crimes like phishing can cost a
typical Fortune 1000 an average of \$4 million per year. Ransomware, the
fastest growing form of cybercrime that has grown 1500% in only two
years, has caused \$5 billion in damages globally last year alone. And
it’s expected to quadruple next year. And we all know that hackers using
bots can seriously interfere with national elections.

What we have now is a rare and unique opportunity to fix online
identity. What we need is true user-centric identity, which is possible
only by making the user central to the administration and control of his
or her own identity. What this means is that we need to understand the
true meaning of digital identity, and in this process, enable greater
user autonomy. To accomplish this, we need to create something we
decentralized identity. This new way of looking at identity requires a
mindshift––to evolve beyond the idea that your identity needs to be
controlled by a government. This new way deconstructing and
reformulating identity requires that you become your own government, to
be your own sovereign. Just as Bitcoin allows you to “be your own bank”,
the *decentralized identity* will empower you to fully control your own
identity.

What’s happening is that we are now transitioning from a digital feudal
system, similar to when vassals owned vast amounts of land in the Middle
Ages. Serfs worked the land to create value but most of the value was
appropriated by the vassal. Today the new asset class is data—where
value is created by all of us but captured entirely by digital vassals
and sovereigns (governments, social media companies, search engines,
banks, etc.). To recapture your data rights, we need to stage an
identity revolution. This, hopefully bloodless, revolution will actually
empower society to lift the effectiveness of society, governments and
businesses to the next level.

This new way to implement universally unique identifiers are called
“DIDs”, or decentralized identifiers, using special features provided by
blockchains. Just like Bitcoin, which uses the blockchain at its core to
provide trust in a trustless environment, the DID can provide identity
services in an environments that do not support trust. At a deeper
level, DIDs are actually the tip of a technological spear, that
unleashes an entirely new layer of decentralized digital identity and
public key infrastructure (PKI) for the Internet. This decentralized
public key infrastructure (DPKI) could have as much impact on global
cybersecurity and cyberprivacy as the development of the SSL/TLS
protocol has had on the Internet of today. This new layer of
functionality is where the value of fixing identity can unlocked,
starting with an emergent technology called the Verifiable Claim.

Imagine a world where identity works. Imagine the end of phishing. The
end of spam. The end of fake news. And the beginning of new era for
society built on a interconnecting web of trust. This is the true
mission of decentralized identity. For this paper, we will envision what
we can do with DIDs and verifiable claims to empower an innovation in
public token offerings, in effect, to invent the next generation ICO. We
believe this would provide a reference application that could not only
validate the power of DIDs and verifiable claims, but to accelerate
adoption as well.

**APPLICATION TO CAPITAL FORMATION**

The first thing we need to agree on is that the Security and Exchange
Commission is not the enemy. In fact, it was created to be the
investor’s best friend, with the investor’s best interests at heart.
(There *are* ways that the SEC favors corporations over people, but we
must remember that it’s walking a fine line to keep everyone happy and
the markets purring.) The threefold mission of the SEC is to protect
investors; to maintain fair, orderly, and efficient markets; and to
facilitate capital formation.

To achieve its goals, the SEC requires the registration of all
securities offerings, as well as the identity and reputation of every
U.S. stockbroker and brokerage firm (a form of identity to enable
tracking and oversight), and demands that investors in the most risky
investments be “accredited”. It also enforces the honest disclosure of
regular financial reporting. Our theory is that the SEC could perform
all three tasks better, faster and cheaper using blockchains, DIDs and
verifiable claims.

For example, when a company launches an IPO under the auspices of the
SEC, it has to truthfully disclose the backgrounds of the management
team, the capitalization structure, and significant strategic
partnerships. The process now entails filing reams of documents, using
accountants and attorneys to double check compliance and provide comfort
letters to attest compliance. Using verifiable claims and the
blockchain’s “self-auditing” feature, we believe that it is possible to
automate each of these functions, and delivering compliance at an order
of magnitude less cost. If the Chief Scientist of your company has a
Ph.D. from MIT, why not include a blockcert that proves this
computationally? If your company has a strategic alliance with a global
distributor, why can’t this be recorded in a verifiable claim? In this
way, the validation of representations in offering documents could be
automatically and digitally validated, costing much less than relying
entirely on attorneys and certified public accountants. As those trust
intermediaries begin to rely on verifiable claims to assume less risk,
they will be able to provide attestations and comfort letters at a much
lower price.

But that’s only the beginning. If your company should lose that
distribution agreement, the verifiable claim could be revoked, and such
information could be relayed immediately, than a mention in the
quarterly earnings call. Using a real-time framework, greater
transparency could be afforded to the investor. This will actually
encourage companies to develop competencies that are better for them
than learning how to hide bad news. For example, companies would be
incented to improve their pipeline of sales prospects, distribution
alternatives and product innovations to better manage risk. This would
shift the focus from needing to exceed expectations in every quarterly
report to increasing the value of foresight and innovation, and help
build stronger and more resilient companies. Using the analogy of
personal health and fitness, increased openness and transparency would
enable a transformational shift from companies focusing on ways to “get
through the next physical” to focusing on managing sustainable wellness.

Another function of the government regulatory bodies is to detect money
laundering by enforcing compliance with KYC (Know Your Customer) laws.
At the same time, governments are telling companies to value the privacy
of its customers with GDPR (General Data Protection Regulation) laws,
because this is a good thing for society. By decentralizing, and moving
identity verification closer to the user, we can satisfy both
requirements simultaneously. In the case of ICOs and KYC, the solution
is to have attorneys attest that a client is not a money launderer. For
example, the investor could be a software engineer who lives in a
repressive regime who was lucky enough to buy Bitcoin very early, but
has left the holdings in cold storage. He simply does not want to
realize a gain until they he has emigrated to a safer country. Remember,
there are several countries where the governmental leaders have made
money by extorting oligarchs––as in “I’ll let you out of jail if you
hand over half your fortune”. These investors would be severely
endangered by the governments need to know everything.

Customer centric solutions are always more effective and will enjoy
greater adoption than government centric solutions. Freezing the assets
of offshore crypto investors, who would prefer to support innovation
globally, is not a wise solution. If we are to move toward a
decentralized world, the forces of centralization need to take a breath
and co-create new solutions that can provide anti-money laundering and
anti-terrorism requirements… but can still insure the privacy and
anonymity of the investor. If attorneys and accountants can attest that
their client is an accredited, why not allow them to attest that they
are not money-launderers? Why not allow them to more effectively manage
their holdings and allow their capital to help make a better world? Why
not endeavor to protect their identity from being leaked to a repressive
regime?

And so, some of the deliverables we hope to develop during the workshop
include:

1.  Create a user persona for a meaningful ICO investor to analyze user
    needs

2.  Develop a detailed use case for an ICO investor

3.  Develop a spec for the use of DID within the reference application

4.  Develop a spec for the use of Verifiable Claims within the reference
    application

5.  Understand social/network interaction functionality between
    investors, company and regulatory agencies to map out downstream
    functionality

6.  Seek input from top tier investors and regulatory agency
    technologists

7.  Open discussion on other issues, such as cognitive models, ROI for
    digital compliance, the the potential use of incentive tokens to
    economically drive the eco-system

**Next Steps**

And so, our goal for this working paper is to map out functionality
against the proposed DID and Verified Claims standards. The proposed
paper will include a design philosophy for the implementation of
decentralized identity within the framework of regulatory compliance and
“zero knowledge” disclosures.

We would like to collaborate with the participants of the Rebooting Web
of Trust Workshop to refine the concepts expressed in the paper and to
more fully develop this use case. Our goal is to improve the standard,
as well as enable the development of a pilot/prototype that demonstrates
a compelling use case in vivo.

**References**

https://github.com/WebOfTrustInfo/rebooting-the-web-of-trust-fall2017/blob/master/topics-and-advance-readings/did-primer.md

https://github.com/WebOfTrustInfo/rebooting-the-web-of-trust-fall2017/blob/master/topics-and-advance-readings/verifiable-claims-primer.md
