# Demos

## HIE of One

Making a standards-based self-sovereign identity stack.

Three components to code:

1. Directory
2. Agent (UMA)
3.

Want to show some features that connect to adoption and OpenConnect papers:

Once you have a self-sovereign agent, you can now decide whether to
whitelist an identity provider or whether you want to accept a
particular credential.

Creates a crossover between the federated world and the self-sovereign
world!

## SIMBOL

Virtual realities want digital identities that move between them,
with all their objects.

SIMBOL is an identity system for VR. Allows portabililty between
virtual worlds.

Built on DIDs, with Verifiable Credentials. (But they're all invisible
to users: it should be simple!)

## Verifiable Displays

Displaying Verifiable Credentials in HTML.

Want to be able to download Credential and be able to see it in
human-readable format and send it as attachment in email.

To do so: put credential in HTML, then HASH it, so can see if it was
tampered with.

## Handshake

Decentralized naming (DNS) project, creating a Decentralied
Certificate Authority.

Embeds DNS root file in blockchain and then offers domains through
auctions.

Could be used to create human-readable names for DIDs, but is that
desireable?

## Digital Trust Protocol

Creating a base layer of trust on the internet: extending human trust
system into digital space.

You trust peers, and that delegates trust, and their decisions now
affect you.

Integrated with Twitter, and allows autoblocking and automuting.

Protocol can be used on reedit, news articles, etc.

## Rabobank SSI Demo

Identity wallet and SSI-as-a-service

Allows elegant retrieval and sharing of data.

## Key Recovery Methodology

Split the seed using Shamir Secret Sharing

3 out of 5 can restore

Invitations are sent out with deep links using preferred communication apps.

Trust is created through six-digit verification code, which must be shared.

To ensure that data isn't lost, health status is sent routinely from
friend's devices.

## IPID

IPID is publishing DID Document using IPLD.

Uses blockchain for independent validation of proof of existence.

Support human-readable name spaces

## Identity Graph

Attention limits what our brain can do.

We can pull data from different groups and create clusters and
quantify the attention.

## Meeco Wallet

Offering equity and value through data that is shared.

Enabling end-to-end use cases and making it simple to navigate.

Supports sharing of Verifiable Credentials.

Zero-knowledge proofs with progressive disclosure

## Identity.com

Open-source community framework used by Civic; their tech is there and
available for others to use.

Presenting today: the Identity Validator Toolkit.

Show validations of credentials wallet.

## Kilt Protocol

Create claims, request attestations, send them to issuers, who create
credentials.

Want to also model more complex trust structures.

## TNO â€” SSI: Why Are We Doing This?

Enabling business transactions.

Current problems: 

Users: people may not know what is asked or where to get
data to enable these transactions.

Businesses: don't know how to verify data.

Using SSI to make this all easier: a little robot can say how to fill
in form and where to get data and how to validate it.

## IXO

Web of Trust for sustainable development.

Can connect with projects and make claims. Everything uses DIDs: the
people and the projects.

## Split Identity Backup

Working on prototypes for an identity wallet. 

Split Backup = Shamir Secret Sharing

A simpler name for use by people who aren't familiar with
cryptography!

Generate QR codes for key shares, then easily rebuilds identities by
scanning.

Part of Blockchain Commons: making what we're doing here real!

## ID PASS SmartCard

ID PASS supports multiple identities and claims

Using smart cards to link to biometrics, but in a decentralized way

This is a real example of what was imagined in the [Joram](https://nbviewer.jupyter.org/github/WebOfTrustInfo/rebooting-the-web-of-trust-fall2016/blob/master/final-documents/joram-engagement-model.pdf) use case produced just a few years ago. 

Can save biometrics on card, can do signatures from card.


