# Community Evolution

This is where we discuss the present and future of the RWOT community.

## Our History

In November 2015: first RWOT. 

There was supposed to be just one event, and it would be rebooted. But
more was needed.

Christopher Allen was benevolent dictator of events up through Paris
(RWOT4), which ended up losing money.

But then more people got involved. Transition was in Boston (RWOT5)
when Joe offered to run in Santa Barbara (RWOT6).

But Joe wanted something more sustainable going forward.

And we needed something that could deal with its own liability and tax
liability.

## Membership Organization

Will become a 501-c6: mutual benefit association.

Three members on board with responsibilities: Christopher A., Joe, Kim D.

We have an advisory committee: Andrew H. Manu S., Sam. And Caelum Labs
joined it for this event.

Need to finish bylaws, have first formal board meeting.

Have _13 founding members_.

Currently have individual memberships, not corporate memberships.

(We may have corporate members at some point, but we don't know what
that means.)

Will have voting for the board, but we intend to protect it, by
limiting to steering committee (or something similar, requiring
continuity).

## Future Rebootings

The next one (RWOT9) planned for Europe. Possibly Switzerland, or
maybe Berlin.

After that, considering Latin America and Asia.

Maybe future rhythm will be hit these four major locales.

## Salons

Christopher has run Design Salons, including
[TokenEthics.com](http://tokenethics.com). There were _participatory_
salons.

We can do these as RWOT, as evening events. And, they don't have to be
technical.

This can help us to maintain continuity on the continents where we're
not running RWOT at the time. 

(Perhaps we could also do Ted Talks.)

## Onboarding

We have tried to onboard people with primers, glossary. But we clearly
need more help. So we're forming a committee. 

## Feedback

More [extensive scribing](https://goo.gl/kLt4Yr) is available on this
section.

Hall-way interactions have produced good, positive friction.

Perhaps it'd be good to have a directory of what everyone is working
on, so people could interact better.
* Some conferences include rosters with mini-bios and photos

Might be fun to create a poster to share what your paper is, at end.

Sometimes people couldn't find groups, so it might be better to
organize space.
* And maybe use an app/spreadsheet to help other people meet up about certain topics.

Maybe some enforced cross-pollination.
* Maybe some experts available for consultation who aren't working on papers.
* Maybe we should have merit badges that people could wear to make it obvious how they can help.
* Another conference recently offered credentials for their participants

Might be nice to have facilitators within groups, mobile, to go and
help groups.

The Topic Papers: There were a lot this time, and this might have been
intimidating.
* Maybe separate papers intended for completion and ones that just suggested interest.
* Could have pre-event meetups if we already knew about papers that might be being written.

Note that we use topic papers as a filter, to get in people who are
willing to write.

We've been talking about tagging papers, maybe we could upvote them too.

Perhaps we need to write paper about coming to conference. [This will
be taken on by onboarding group.]

Perhaps we can use collaborative products like Slido to help figure
who is working on what and what their interests on

Maybe do a short workshop on Github via Zoom.

Maybe do a step-by-step description of what we're doing.
* Maybe local meetups all over.
* Film it and have repository?

We need to have a unified message about what we are. 
* Stickers, pins, etc.
* Physical artifacts create a psychological response.

We could build graphs of papers from this community, to show which
ones are influencing others.

There is appreciation of the openness of this group, and of our work
product, despite it being disruptive.

What we are doing could be considered an educational exercise â€” an
educational mission.

Perhaps we could share our Google Docs as we're writing.

We have ENTHUSIASM and SPEED and press for RESULTS. However, sometimes
we might need to slow down.

Maybe we should have a better way to help people progress existing
papers. Or to push specific topics.

Maybe we should be pushing beyond use cases to implementations.

Upcoming challenges in 12-18 months:
* Interop. We need cross-collaboration.
* Use Cases. There are some great ones that under NDA, and they're different from what we're seeing here. And we could get more funding for community if we were able to address these NDA-ed use Cases!

There seem to be two drivers: people who want independence, and no
dependence; and there are people who want web to work in a more
humanistic way. _What are we trying to do?_

## Conclusion

We had feedback both on what we're doing and how RWOT is doing it. 

RWOT is just one tool, W3C is another, and there may be even other
ways to accomodate some of this feedback.


