**Towards a Sustainable Technology Commons**

Version 1.0

First draft for submission

Rebooting Web of Trust 6

Santa Barbara, March 6-8, 2018

Authors

Heather Vescent

Kaliya Young

Adrian Gropper

Juan Caballero

**Todos & Completion Plan**

-   Heather to write first draft by EOD March 16, 2018

-   Review 1: Team review/comments

-   Revision 1

-   Review 2

-   Revision 2: for Final Acceptance

**Introduction**

There are technology commons and they have varying levels of success.
Capitalism can not produce innovations/innovative products without
utilizing commons. However capitalist activities do not have a financial
feedback mechanism to support commons. It is as if commons and
capitalism are oil and water, but they need to work together and support
each other's aims. Doing so can create a more sustainable and thriving
commons that enables and supports more technology innovation.

**Part 1: What is a Technology Commons**

1.  We identified four characteristics of sustainable technology
    > commons.

    a.  **Re-decentralization **

        i.  Is the reverse trend towards web ecosystem driven by
            > privacy-poor, big-data players, move towards decentralized
            > "Web. 1.0" via self-sovereign identity system. It is the
            > counter-trend to centralized web services successfully
            > deployed by a few successful corporations (e.g. Google,
            > Amazon)

        ii. It's also called web 3.0 (P2P, blockchain, and other
            > self-sovereign tech).

        iii. It's a cultural swing back towards early internet attitude
            > and distributed days of the well.

    b.  **Sustainable Capitalism**

        iv. Foster more-sustainable forms of capitalism and intellectual
            > property \-- consider economic externalities and
            > end-to-end infrastructural costs; protecting standards
            > process from financial influence.

        v.  Capitalism is used to leverage production and market
            > diversity/competition, but not for greed or the detriment
            > of the commons.

        vi. Understand and include market externalities.

    c.  **Infrastructure**

        vii. Treat specification and protocol as a public
            > infrastructure, considering all web users as stakeholders.

        viii. The internet and technology protocols are similar to roads
            > and other infrastructure.

    d.  **Human Dignity**

        ix. Protecting privacy and self-sovereignty are this protocol's
            > duty to human dignity.

2.  These ideas grow fastest in an atmosphere of identity and autonomy,
    > yet the pressures of interfacing with existing systems (data
    > systems but also systems of intellectual property and/or social
    > control and capital capture)

3.  Summary of the Ad-Hoc technology commons

    e.  We applied Appreciative Inquiry to three variations of ad-hoc
        > technology commons. Results of what we found.

**Part 2: What are existing technology commons models?**

Identifying commons and commons-adjacent models for building/designing
trust systems & protocols. We identified and categorized a variety of
commons models and commons adjacent models.

Commons are many and varied as the commons that are used, how they are
used and who uses them. Christopher Allen has a nice blog post that
reviews Elinor Ostrim's 8 principles of Commons.

The authors brainstormed and identified multiple commons models and
variations within those models.

**Commons Models**

1.  **Ad-hoc Tech R&D**

    a.  Variations not mutually exclusive:

    b.  Variation: Benevolent Dictator

    c.  Variation: Do-Ocracy - peer to peer volunteer model

    d.  Variation: Blockchain - issue residuals to contributors

    e.  Examples: RWOT, IIW, Digital Life Collective, MIT Bitcoin
        > cryptocurrency club; all examples of tech co-ops. What is it
        > what separates these three things.

2.  **Open Standards**

    f.  Maximize transparency in process of creating protocols. Treat
        > like public infrastructure.

    g.  A spectrum of regulatory capture

        i.  Ex: HL7 mixing up data model and authorization to lock out
            > any open source implementation

        ii. Social media context (Diaspora ignoring media goblin's
            > standards)

        iii. Layered (scope-specific) standards are more resistant to
            > the corrosive influence of regulatory capture

        iv. Multi-stakeholder process may help this along

3.  **Government Funded R&D**

    h.  Example: America by Design

4.  **Open Source**

**Commons Adjacent Business Models**

5.  **Corporate Non-Profit (e.g. Swift), Corporate Co-Op **

    i.  Closed process for producing standards that may or may not be
        > open when finalized.

    j.  Non-profit representing a consortium of corporate of interests
        > rather than a community.

    k.  Controlled.

    l.  Technology could be licensed for profit.

6.  **Closed Technology**

    m.  Radically permission & open licensing.

    n.  Centrifugal IP ownership.

7.  **Pirate / Whaling ship model**

    o.  Shares in what is being created.

**Part 3: Appreciative Inquiry on Ad-hoc Technology Models**

To limit the scope of this paper to fit into RWOT timeboxing, we choose
to focus our area of inquiry on the commons model we were in - the
ad-hoc technology R&D community. Using the example of RWOT, IIW, Digital
Life Collective, which are all examples of tech co-ops, we applied the
Appreciative Inquiry principles. Our process was to go through the
following principles for the three variations. We then selected the
positive aspects across the examples to identify the overall positive
aspects of this technology model as a whole.

Caveat: While this is a limited set of examples, it is also a deep place
of information - due to the longevity of the events and the
participation of the authors. However, participants of the events have
and participate for different reasons. Our inquiry was limited to the
authors and what we know second hand from other participants. Additional
inquiry to other participants may reveal other positive aspects. We use
this starting point as a basis for our inquiry and invite others (and
ourselves) to build upon it.

**Appreciative Inquiry Principles**

1.  The **Constructivist Principle** is the rule that we see the world
    > as we are: our interior state, our mores, values and experiences
    > create the lens in which we view the world.

2.  The **Poetic Principle** says, what we focus on grows.

3.  The **Simultaneity Principle** is the rule that when we ask the
    > questions we have already begun to change. I like to think of this
    > as change in-flight. Change doesn't happen in a vacuum, or only in
    > a certain segment of a process. Change is happening all the time,
    > at any stage of the process. How is your participation changing
    > you right now?

4.  The **Anticipatory Principle** is the rule that what we believe, we
    > conceive.

5.  The **Positive Principle** is where we identify and leverage
    > strengths. I like to remember the successes we have already
    > experienced as part of history.

**Examples of Ad-hoc Technology R&D Commons **

**RWOT**

1.  Constructionist Principle: we see the world as we are

    a.  Event Outcome: SSI standards, Reboot the web of trust, focused
        > on DID

    b.  Mostly technical and focused on specific outcomes.

    c.  Want to stay productive. Not focused on growing attendance
        > numbers, but instead having the "right" people attend.

2.  Poetic Principle: what we focus on grows

    d.  Specs, papers, working together, SS standards - harmonize
        > standards.

    e.  Not focusing on agency (own your own bot, technology, blockchain
        > node, being self-sovereign, add your own technology that acts
        > as your agent).

    f.  Make this community sustainable.

3.  Simultaneity Principle: The questions we are cause us to change.

    g.  (How) can we be (more) sustainable?

4.  Anticipatory Principle: what we believe, we conceive.

    h.  Looking at blockchain in the larger perspective of the human
        > existence. Understand the limitations of blockchain and crypto
        > in general and broaden the utility of the tech to the human
        > condition. This other world, starts with identity, agency,
        > sovereignty - RWOT is where it is happening - not at "MIT's
        > blockchain club" or other Blockchain technical exchanges more
        > overtly or covertly motivated by \[capitalizable\] adoption
        > and implementation.

    i.  Learning and working together - educational exchange feels open
        > and protected.

    j.  There is a reputational credit for those who participate.

    k.  Non-recognition kills people's desire to participate.

    l.  It might not be around forever - it is expected it to end at
        > some point.

5.  Positive Principle: identify and leverage strengths.

    m.  People are writing code furiously and entirely focused on
        > timelines and deliverables (instead of posturing and
        > networking as they might do at other meetings of specialists.)

    n.  There's (almost) a spec. This is a big deal.

    o.  The event supports people from faraway places to work together
        > for extended periods of time. This creates stronger human
        > bonds to work together on projects - making problem solving
        > easier.

    p.  People are active in other spheres. There is a lot going in the
        > community members than in other communities - between the
        > 2/times a year meeting.

    q.  People show up here and show their work.

    r.  Topic papers are before the event and asked to read this before
        > you come.

**Internet Identity Workshop**

1.  Constructionist Principle: we see the world as we are

    a.  The opening/structure/time-space grid so that signals keep being
        > voiced in digital identity. Bringing people together. A
        > consistent space for the identity community.

    b.  Community space for a mailing list to meet in person. Eating
        > together.

    c.  Has a sustainable business model.

2.  Poetic Principle: what we focus on grows

    d.  Focus is on the edge.

    e.  Not trying to grow and stay comfortable niche.

    f.  Peer to peer learning and doing at the edge of the environment.
        > Not a place to learn how does this technology work, but to
        > explore the edge of what is possible with the tech.

    g.  More generative. More open ended.

3.  Simultaneity Principle: The questions we are cause us to change.

    h.  What do we replace federation with? What comes after federation?

4.  Anticipatory Principle: what we believe, we conceive.

    i.  It's always going to be around.

    j.  I'll learn something new about the edge.

    k.  It is the prototype/living example of open space technology.

    l.  It has changed (gradually) over time.

    m.  Responsive to the community.

    n.  It's free - as in free beer vs freedom. It's in the same space
        > as RSA, whereas RSA is expensive and on lockdown, IIW has much
        > lower barriers to participate.

5.  Positive Principle: identify and leverage strengths.

    o.  It's a huge garden with participants from: amazon, google, VM
        > ware, oracle, etc.

    p.  Amplify's what is on the edge.

    q.  Has longevity and history. Community memory

    r.  Concentrated: One IIW is worth 6 months of time in the identity
        > community. Accelerates learning time and creates stronger
        > broader deeper relationships.

    s.  IIW allows others to use the space for their agenda.

**DigLife**

1.  Constructionist Principle: we see the world as we are

    a.  "Tech we trust for the world we want."

    b.  Trust the technology.

    c.  Part of the re-decentralized movement. (Moving back to Web 1.0
        > in terms of decentralization; web 3.0 more P2P, blockchain,
        > and self-sovereign tech.)

    d.  Creating governance to assign resources/investment/budgeting,
        > tracking reputation and credit, relative to tokens, rather
        > than use money itself.

    e.  People should be able to work and get paid, without working for
        > an employer. Without having the institution hold the job you
        > do to get paid. You do the job and you get paid, but not
        > through a company. People are working as individuals. Not a
        > decentralized gig economy with a middleman (uber), its a
        > decentralized community without a middleman - their own
        > governance.

    f.  They have a resource allocation component. (There is no currency
        > associated with RWOT or IIW). However there is a struggle
        > between governance and production/outcome. There are many more
        > people talking about governance than coding. Uses open source.
        > But not enough coders.

    g.  Governance is a part of the daily actions and is overhead.

    h.  Simultaneity Principle: The questions we are cause us to change.

    i.  What is your capital formation model for your project?

2.  Poetic Principle: what we focus on grows

    j.  Completely focused on growing its membership.

    k.  Focused on the amount of resources they can allocate.

    l.  Sustainable capitalism and IP.

    m.  Creating an environment where people can contribute to the
        > cooperative.

    n.  The cooperative is in a position to have budget to build the
        > tech.

3.  Anticipatory Principle: what we believe, we conceive.

    o.  Don't trust technology created by a centralized VC
        > funded/capitalist model.

    p.  Capitalism does not/will not create technology we trust.

4.  Positive Principle: identify and leverage strengths.

    q.  Build bridges and convene across a bunch of technologies.
        > Connect the dots in various technologies that need to be
        > connected.

    r.  I trust them to filter. The community tests, vets, and reviews
        > these new technologies. I trust their reviews because they
        > have my same values. This helps me discover new technology.

**Part 4: Areas for further research**

The initial scope of the project wanted to apply AI to the identified
models in the topic paper. To keep scope within what was possible in the
time at RWOT, we reduced scope. Additional papers or inquiry could
explore the other commons and commons-adjacent models using Appreciative
Inquiry. In addition, we could also brainstorm and identify additional
commons models and examples.

1.  Feature set for technology to support a sustainable common. Once we
    > understand the characteristics of a sustainable technology
    > commons, we can draft a set of requirements or use cases that
    > technology may be able to "solve." This activity is deferred to a
    > future paper/activity.

2.  Continue to apply Appreciative Inquiry on other identified models
    > (identified in Part 2).

    a.  **Constructionist Principle**: We see the community/commons as
        > we are.

    b.  **Poetic Principle**: What we focus on grows. What is the
        > commons focusing on? What does the commons want to grow (that
        > they are not focusing on)?

    c.  **Simultaneity Principle**: The questions that are causing us to
        > change.

    d.  **Anticipatory Principle:** What we believe, we conceive. What
        > does the commons believe? What do the participants in the
        > commons believe? What beliefs need to change to create the
        > world they want?

    e.  **Positive Principle:** Identify and leverage strengths. What
        > are the strengths of the commons? How can they be leveraged?

3.  Utilize Appreciative Inquiry on Self-sovereign identity.

    f.  Apply appreciative inquiry on self-sovereign identity... does it
        > satisfy needs of technology commons? In what ways? In what
        > ways does it fall short?

4.  Explore artificial intelligence as a technology method to identify
    > market externalities.

**Bibliography**

-   Economic History of the Open Source movement

    -   [[https://www.amazon.com/Success-Open-Source-Steven-Weber/dp/0674018583]{.underline}](https://www.amazon.com/Success-Open-Source-Steven-Weber/dp/0674018583)

-   Protocol (Open Standards \> Open Source)

    -   [[https://www.amazon.com/Protocol-Control-Exists-Decentralization-Leonardo/dp/0262572338/ref=sr\_1\_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1520380967&sr=8-1&keywords=protocol+control+decentralization]{.underline}](https://www.amazon.com/Protocol-Control-Exists-Decentralization-Leonardo/dp/0262572338/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1520380967&sr=8-1&keywords=protocol+control+decentralization)

-   Sustainable/anti-corporate business models

    -   [[https://www.amazon.com/Good-News-Change-Everyday-Helping/dp/155054926X/ref=sr\_1\_2?ie=UTF8&qid=1520381113&sr=8-2&keywords=good+news+for+a+change]{.underline}](https://www.amazon.com/Good-News-Change-Everyday-Helping/dp/155054926X/ref=sr_1_2?ie=UTF8&qid=1520381113&sr=8-2&keywords=good+news+for+a+change)

-   Do-acracy (Anarchist co-ops)

    -   [[http://www.heathervescent.com/heathervescent/2007/04/doocracy.html]{.underline}](http://www.heathervescent.com/heathervescent/2007/04/doocracy.html)

    -   [[http://www.heathervescent.com/heathervescent/2007/11/shes-geeky-sess.html]{.underline}](http://www.heathervescent.com/heathervescent/2007/11/shes-geeky-sess.html)

    -   [[http://www.heathervescent.com/heathervescent/2008/01/good-article-on.html]{.underline}](http://www.heathervescent.com/heathervescent/2008/01/good-article-on.html)

-   On Govt Funded R&D: America by Design

    -   [[https://www.amazon.com/America-Design-Technology-Corporate-Capitalism/dp/0195026187/]{.underline}](https://www.amazon.com/America-Design-Technology-Corporate-Capitalism/dp/0195026187/)

-   Link to previous notes (Juan)

    -   [[https://docs.google.com/document/d/1YdqevS-kvFvktbTKOn5tqihfv\_BU-1d4ZpUYW5S7OLQ/edit]{.underline}](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1YdqevS-kvFvktbTKOn5tqihfv_BU-1d4ZpUYW5S7OLQ/edit)

-   Christopher Allen's blog post about Commons Governance Models

    -   [[http://www.lifewithalacrity.com/2015/11/a-revised-ostroms-design-principles-for-collective-governance-of-the-commons-.html]{.underline}](http://www.lifewithalacrity.com/2015/11/a-revised-ostroms-design-principles-for-collective-governance-of-the-commons-.html)
