How to Convince Dad\* of the Importance of Self-Sovereign Identity
==================================================================

### \* and your sister and your daughter and your best friend and your nephew

##### by Shannon Appelcline, Kenneth Bok, Lucas Parker, Peter Scott, and Matthew Wong

Abstract
--------

One of the major problems with bootstrapping self-sovereign identity is
that it requires adoption by a large number of people. Pushing
self-sovereign identity from the top-down is most likely to result in a
technology that’s not actually used, but instead encouraging the average
person to demand self-sovereign identity from the bottom-up will result
in the organic development of a vibrant, well-utilized decentralized
web-of-trust ecosystem.

This paper addresses that need by offering arguments to a variety of
people who might be reluctant to use self-sovereign identity,
uninterested in its possibilities, or oblivious to the dangers of
centralization. By focusing on the needs of real people, we hope to also
encourage developers, engineers, and software business owners to create
the apps that will address their reluctance and fulfill their needs,
making self-sovereign identity a reality.

Introduction
------------

"Cogito ergo sum — I think, therefore I am."
\~René Descartes

"Identity is a uniquely human concept; however modern society view this
concept of identity as state-issued credentials such as driver’s license
and social security cards, which suggests a person can lose his very
identity if a state revokes his credentials or even if he just crosses
state borders. **I think, but I am not**."
\~ Christopher Allen

The possibility of losing your identity is a serious problem in the
digital world. Vloggers could lose their identities if YouTube closes
their accounts, while common internet citizens like you and me could
lose a big part of our life if Facebook revokes our credentials. As
digital accounts become a major part of our identities, we need a
paradigm that allows us to bring identity back under our control.

Self-sovereign identity seeks to be that new model, creating a paradigm
shift in an increasingly data-governed world. It puts the individual in
control of her identity and prioritizes her privacy. It does so by
acting as the root anchor for an individual’s data stream, permitting an
individual to manage, store, and control her own data and life. It could
become a ubiquitous technology that affects the lives of billions on a
daily basis.

This runs counter to the traditional model for online identity, designed
from the perspective of the corporation and government, with the needs
of the individual being secondary. In the age of "Surveillance
Capitalism", personal data is typically abused by large corporations in
the never-ending quest for profit, disregarding user privacy and
inadequately safeguarding user data. The Equifax hack in late 2017 and
the Cambridge Analytica scandal highlight the risks of large,
centralized databases of personal information (i.e. honeypots of data),
which present high-value targets for hackers.

But how do we convince the average person to move from the old,
centralized model to the new, self-sovereign model? We think that this
requires proactively fulfilling their needs. To highlight these needs,
we’ve created case studies for five people who could be served by
self-sovereign identity, if they were only aware of its possibilities.
They are:

-   Your dad, who is preparing for retirement;

-   Your sister, who is a world traveller;

-   Your daughter, who is a reckless social media user;

-   Your best friend, who is a content creator; and

-   Your nephew, who runs a convenience store.

These five people represent a spectrum of use-cases and applications,
meant to portray some of the monumental possibilities of self-sovereign
identity in the not-so-distant future. They are concentrated in the
developed world, because we believe that is where adoption of
self-sovereign identity will begin. Some of these use cases are possible
now, while others will require a more fully fleshed-out web-of-trust
ecosystem.

Your Dad is Preparing for Retirement
------------------------------------

Dad is getting ready to retire, which has him thinking more about his
financial security. So much is online now! He has to use his laptop
computer to pay some of his bills from his bank account, and he looks at
his retirement accounts through his browser too. He has a few different
logins and passwords, because the different institutions have different
requirements. He keeps them written down on a yellow post-it that he
hides in his desk drawer.

Recently, Dad has become paranoid about having his money stolen because
his best friend got phished by someone claiming that their Microsoft
Windows installation needed updating, which let the hackers install a
keylogger on their computer and steal some money.

Though Dad finally traded in his flip phone for a smartphone last year,
he doesn’t use it for anything but reading news stories and text
messages.

*“I hate having to log into so many financial accounts.”*

*The Problem.* Dad gets annoyed at all these confusing accounts and
logins and passwords. He’d like to have a single account that accesses
all of his financial services and he’d prefer not to need a login and
password for it at all.

*The Solution.* Using his self-sovereign identity, Dad can federate
logins to various financial services. He accesses it using biometrics:
he just looks at his smartphone’s camera, it scans his face, and then
the smartphone verifies his identity to his laptop. This gives him
access to all of his federated financial accounts without needing to
type logins or passwords. An app on his laptop consolidates all of the
information from the accounts and allows him to view his finances, write
checks, and free up retirement money.

*“I’m afraid someone will steal my money through some sort of fake
login.”*

*The Problem.* Dad is especially vulnerable to phishing attacks, in
which someone obtains access to his financial account by pretending to
represent the financial institution. He lives in constant fear of
losing his nest egg: he is concerned that it is impossible to tell the
difference between a legitimate representative and a scammer.

*The Solution.* Because Dad logs in using his smartphone and face
recognition, there is no way for him to accidentally log in to a fake
portal. The application will take him to the correct site.

*“If I get my identity stolen, I’m screwed.”*

*The Problem.* Dad has heard a lot about the ravages of identity theft:
attackers stole names, phone numbers, and addresses from Home Depot and
stole reams of identity information from Equifax. Dad is afraid that the
thieves could use this information to steal his money at his financial
institutions or to take out credit or loans in his name.

*The Solution.* This sort of breach would be less likely in a world of
self-sovereign identity because users can safeguard their information
under their self-sovereign identity, preventing it from entering large
honeypots of personally identifiable information (PII). But, even if a
breach were to expose Dad’s information, it wouldn’t affect his access
to financial institutions: the PII wouldn’t give access to his accounts
without validation from his smartphone; if someone tried to take out a
new loan using his PII, the bank or credit bureau would reach out to Dad
for verification. Thus, in the world of self-sovereign identity, PII is
less valuable and its use is more tightly under Dad’s control.

Your Sister is a World Traveller 
---------------------------------

Sis works with *Médecins Sans Frontières* offering humanitarian
assistance. This brings her to dozens of countries, some of which have
non-western values. Sometimes she’s been targeted by the authorities,
which has put her in jeopardy. She also has occasionally needed to seek
treatment in these countries due to the problems that a varying diet
causes for her diabetes.

*“I’m afraid of losing my passport.”*

*The Problem.* Sis was once forced to leave her passport behind when she
had to flee a city: she was afraid to return to her lodgings due to the
local authority’s disagreement with *MSF*. This terrified her, because a
passport is expected to be in a traveler’s possession when they are
traveling in a foreign country. This left her unable to easily leave the
country, which she now felt was hostile to her presence. Replacing her
passport was both time consuming and logistically challenging. She is
horrified by the idea of repeating this experience.

*The Solution.* Sis has a digital passport stored on a hardware device
that acts as a data store. She keeps it attached to her keychain. She
can unlock and transmit her passport data using her thumbprint. If she
loses her physical passport, she has this backup. Authorities in some
countries may accept it themselves, but otherwise, she can use it
anywhere to establish her identity to the local embassy by logging into
her government’s online platform.

*“I don’t want the police looking at my passport if they stop me.”*

*The Problem.* Due to her country of origin, Sis experienced harassment from the police when they were
reviewing her passport. She also endured
extensive interviews because of the countries she has visited.

*The Solution.* When Sis enters a country, the border agents issue
digital documents (a verifiable credential) approving her legal status
in the country for a certain span of time. She adds this to her
self-sovereign identity’s data store. When she is stopped by the police,
she uses her hardware device to selectively disclose only her name and
the credential issued by the border agents. The police now know who she
is and what her status is; they don’t need to know about her country of
origin or past travels. The border agents have already verified that
information, so she doesn’t need to give it to the municipal
authorities.

*“I worry that I don’t have all of my health records with me.”*

*The Problem.* Sis has type 1 diabetes and has to ensure her sugar
levels remain stable. If she were to have a medical emergency while
traveling, she needs the doctors to know the details of her condition,
including her current medications and allergies, without having to carry
a sheaf of documents.

*The Solution.* Sis keeps her medical records on her hardware device.
Using her self-sovereign identity, she can protect the information or
share it when necessary. In addition, the encoded, digital nature of her
medical records makes it easy to translate into different languages.
When she visits the local doctor, it is presented in the local language,
courtesy of the AI-powered translation program.

Your Daughter is a Reckless Social Media User
---------------------------------------------

Daughter has spent her life publishing pictures, tweeting, and posting
on social media services such as Facebook and Snapchat. Now that she is
going for job interviews, she realizes that all of her photos of holidays and
parties and all of her tweets are a bit more public than she would
like.

*“I don’t want to show my employer everything.”*

*The Problem.* Daughter is going for a job interview soon and has heard
rumors of employers making hiring decisions based on social media
profiles. She is concerned over which of her images and tweets will turn
up if they access her social media profiles.

*The Solution.* With self-sovereign identity, Daughter has granular
control over who sees what in her social media feeds. When she gives
access to potential employers, she gives access to feeds that
selectively disclose specific tags.

*“I’ve put something online that I can’t take back.”*

*The Problem.* Daughter’s photo blog features a picture of her in front
of a popular storefront very near her home. This photo went viral over
the weekend, which brought a huge amount of attention to her online
presence. Shortly afterward, she got a creepy email from someone
mentioning the store she was at and the city it’s in; she’s afraid she
accidentally revealed too much about herself.

*The Solution.* Daughter’s self-sovereign identity is on her mobile
phone, and it signs every picture she takes and stores that signature as
part of the image file. This allows her to prove ownership of the photo.
After she realizes the picture is problematic, Daughter’s robo-attorney
sends out a signed takedown request to the social media networks and
search engines; most sites will remove the photo since she can prove her
ownership of the photo.

*“I’m afraid of being doxxed.”*

*The Problem.* In recent years, Daughter has been vocal on the issue of presentation of
female characters in video games. She just heard
about a few friends getting doxxed because of similar comments online.
She is afraid that she might be a target of harassment.

*The Solution.* Daughter’s social media platform incorporates many novel
features that evolved out of the self-sovereign ecosystem. This enables
her to selectively disclose her PII only to people who have received
attestations from a select group of friends that she defines. She
immediately activates this feature to better control access to her
personal information.

Your Best Friend is a Content Creator
-------------------------------------

Best Friend is working in a non-Western country. He’s an entrepreneur
who regularly vlogs about the local startup scene. Sometimes, his
comments are opinionated, which has caused tension with these companies
and the local government that supports them. His vlogs are posted to the
local social media networks, which are also controlled by that
government, but his followers are worldwide, including both local and
Western business leaders.

*“I don’t want my followers to lose access to my published work.”*

*The Problem.* The local social media network has a reputation for
following the whims of the local government. Sometimes they arbitrarily
delete posts that they don’t agree with. Best Friend is concerned that
when this happens, his followers will see references and citations to
his work, but not be able to access the original posts.

*The Solution.* Best Friend uses his self-sovereign identity to publish
all of his videos. They’re posted to his data store, a decentralized
file storage and delivery system that is accessible through his
self-sovereign identity and provably attributable to him. Hyperlinked
citations and references connect to this original data source. Even if
the content on the local social network is removed, anyone looking at a
citation or reference can still find the original content and know that
he wrote it — even though it’s no longer connected to his social media
presence.

*“I’m afraid of losing my followers”*

*The Problem.* If Best Friend is sufficiently troublesome, the local
government might delete his social media account entirely. This could
cost him all the connections and relationships that he’s built on the
social media network.

*The Solution.* Best Friend created his social media account using his
self-sovereign identity, fundamentally linking them. His western
followers tended to do the same, while his local followers only have
localized accounts. If his local social media account is deleted, he
automatically maintains links to everyone with a self-sovereign
identity. Unfortunately, he loses access to all of the followers with
local accounts, but his self-sovereign identity’s decentralized
identifier (DID) was available through his social media account and
remains available through any citations and references. Any local
follower could choose to link to his self-sovereign identity with this
information.

*“I don’t want to get arrested for what I write.”*

*The Problem.* The local government has decided Best Friend is
troublesome and actively targets him for a smear and disinformation
campaign, designed to get him arrested. They do so by publishing
portions of his material that are taken out of context with a negative
spin.

*The Solution.* All of Best Friend’s videos are time-stamped and then
signed with his self-sovereign identity. He can refute the
out-of-context statement by showing the full video, proving that it is
his, and demonstrating its origin. The more reputable news agencies only
use signed videos of this sort; though the propaganda network continues
using the out-of-context video, no one else replicates it.

Your Nephew Runs a Convenience Store
------------------------------------

Nephew has decided to open his first business! However, he wants to do
more than just run a simple convenience store: he wants to run a
convenience store that’s sustainable. He’s done a good job of getting it
off the ground, but he’s a one-man operation, and sometimes details slip
through the cracks. He is also thinking about serial entrepreneurship,
so he doesn’t plan for this to be his last venture.

*“I don’t want to accidentally sell products that aren’t sustainable if
I say they are.”*

*The Problem.* Nephew is concerned with the claims that various products
make about their sustainability and provenance. There have been many
recent articles about false claims, and his customers are asking
questions that he can’t answer. For his brand to stand out, he wants a
degree of confidence about the products he’s selling.

*The Solution.* Independent inspectors create verifiable credentials for
the authenticity of the sustainable products that Nephew sells in his
store. Nephew authenticates these credentials and attests their veracity
with his self-sovereign identity. So long as his customers trust him,
they no longer need to verify the authenticity of their goods
themselves, though they may if they wish.

*“I want to be able to get the best value for my business when I sell.”
*

*The Problem.* Nephew knows that he could open the books of his business
to show its profitability and lay out its money flow to potential
purchasers. But this information isn’t verifiable!

*The Solution.* Nephew, with the aid of self-sovereign identity, can
provide a full-spectrum, well-defined, verifiable suite of business
analytics. Every purchase order, credit card sale, inventory item, and
bill payment is signed with the business’ decentralized identifier
(DID), a component of his self-sovereign identity. This provability
increases the value of his business.

*“I forget to order things sometimes.”*

*The Problem.* Because of his lack of staff, Nephew worries about losing
track of inventory, which can result in delays of supply that have a
negative impact on revenue.

*The Solution.* Nephew has granted permissions to his smart refrigerator
to use the business’ DID to initiate and sign purchase orders on his
behalf. Because the refrigerator has sensors that track inventory,
supplies are reordered automatically. The fridge issues a purchase order
signed with the business’ DID and the refrigerator’s DID, verifying both
the authenticity and the origin of the order. This in turn gives his
supplier a sense of security that the orders are valid. Milk arrives a
day later and is loaded into the drinks cooler.

Conclusion
----------

These use cases may be just what you need to convince your dad (or
sister or daughter or best friend or nephew) of the importance of
self-sovereign identity. You can use them as a library of arguments to
bring around people who are interested, respectively, in finance,
government, privacy, content, or business.

And, these possibilities are just the tip of the iceberg. Because the
adoption of self-sovereign identity is likely to begin in the developed
world, the use cases in this paper focused on our own privileged family
members. However, self-sovereign identity might be even more useful for
marginalized people, who could gain protections that the developed world
takes for granted. Refugees could be guaranteed identity when they flee
their home state; peoples living in autocratic societies could enjoy new
protections; and disadvantaged people could see their playing fields
leveled. Self-sovereign identity could radically change the structure of
the social contract.

The catch is that we’re not there yet. Though some of the arguments in
this paper refer to technologies that are already being specified and
implemented, others remain mere possibilities. In order to convince dad
(and sis and the rest) fully, we need to be able to point not just to
our dreams of self-sovereign identity, but also to a concrete reality.

That’s where *you* come in. If you’re a developer, an engineer, or a
software business owner, you can help realize these ideas. This article
systematically approaches the problems that might be faced by people
using the internet for five broad classes of works, imagines the very
real problems they currently experience, and suggests how self-sovereign
identity could offer solutions. The following table summarizes many of
these possibilities:

  **Actor**   |  **Category**  | **Needs**
  -------------|--------------|-------------------------------------
  Dad       |    Finance   |     1.  Self-sovereign federated logins<br>2.  Biometric logins<br>3.  Validated identity                          
  Sister   |     Government   |  1.  Digital passport<br>2.  Selective identity disclosure<br>3.  Digital health records
  Daughter   |   Privacy    |    1.  Selective data disclosure<br>2.  Data revocation<br>3.  Automated identity disclosure                             
  Best Friend |  Content     |   1.  Self-sovereign content<br> 2.  Self-sovereign relationships<br>3.  Validated content                 
Nephew     |   Business   |    1.  Verifiable credentials<br>2.  Validated finances<br>3.  Delegated identity

Offering concrete solutions for these use cases could drive adoption of
self-sovereign identity. We thus encourage software developers to
consider these needs and see if they can make the solutions that fulfill
them a reality.

Of course, any new identity system must be built with care, as it could
be misused if it’s poorly developed. We don’t want to increase the
attack surfaces on identity, and we definitely don’t want to create new
honeypots. Keeping the focus on *self-sovereign* identity should put the
Internet’s next identity system on the right path.

*We own our identities*.

References
----------

Allen, Christopher. “The Path to Self-Sovereign Identity.” *Life with
Alacrity*. April 25, 2016.
http://www.lifewithalacrity.com/2016/04/the-path-to-self-soverereign-identity.html.

Andrieu, Joe, Frederic Engel, Adam Lake, Moses Ma, Olivier Maas, and
Mark Van Der Waal. “Re-Imagining What Users Really Want.” *Rebooting the
Web of Trust.* September 27, 2017.
*https://github.com/WebOfTrustInfo/rebooting-the-web-of-trust-spring2017/blob/master/final-documents/what-users-really-want.pdf*.

Berners-Lee, Tim. "A Public Identity." A Public Identity - Design
Issues. January 19, 2018..
https://www.w3.org/DesignIssues/PublicIdentity.html.

Casey, Michael. "Blockchain Technology: Redefining Trust for a Global,
Digital Economy." *Medium.* June 14, 2016.
https://medium.com/mit-media-lab-digital-currency-initiative/blockchain-technology-redefining-trust-for-a-global-digital-economy-1dc869593308.

Broudy, Alex. "How Blockchains and Decentralized ID Solutions Flip the
Switch on Privacy." *CryptoDigest.* June 12, 2018.
https://cryptodigestnews.com/how-blockchains-and-decentralized-id-solutions-flip-the-switch-on-privacy-63e21e060670.

Pettey, Christy. "The Beginner's Guide to Decentralized Identity."
*Smarter With Gartner.* June 28, 2018. .
https://www.gartner.com/smarterwithgartner/the-beginners-guide-to-decentralized-identity/.

Rosenberg, Matthew, Nicholas Confessore, and Carole Cadwalladr. "How
Trump Consultants Exploited the Facebook Data of Millions." *The New
York Times.* March 17, 2018.
https://www.nytimes.com/2018/03/17/us/politics/cambridge-analytica-trump-campaign.html.

Smolenski, Natalie. "The Evolution of Trust in a Digital Economy."
*Scientific American.* Accessed January
2018.https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/the-evolution-of-trust-in-a-digital-economy/.

Stempel, Jonathan. "Home Depot Settles Consumer Lawsuit over Big 2014
Data Breach." *Reuters*. March 08, 2016.
https://www.reuters.com/article/us-home-depot-breach-settlement/home-depot-settles-consumer-lawsuit-over-big-2014-data-breach-idUSKCN0WA24Z.

Swamynathan, Yashaswini. "Equifax Reveals Hack That Likely Exposed Data
of 143 Million Customers." *Reuters*. September 08, 2017.
[*https://www.reuters.com/article/us-equifax-cyber/equifax-reveals-hack-that-likely-exposed-data-of-143-million-customers-idUSKCN1BI2VK*](https://www.reuters.com/article/us-equifax-cyber/equifax-reveals-hack-that-likely-exposed-data-of-143-million-customers-idUSKCN1BI2VK).

Wolff, Josephine. "How a 2011 Hack You've Never Heard of Changed the
Internet's Infrastructure." *Slate Magazine.* December 21, 2016.
https://slate.com/technology/2016/12/how-the-2011-hack-of-diginotar-changed-the-internets-infrastructure.html
