# multiplexed: a 'slightly radical' framing of identity

- du5t@multiplexed.be

In this short paper we hope to sketch a framing of identity that may be
perceived at first blush as 'slightly radical', but is relatively free of
preconceptions, and therefore most useful for the design of new systems that
establish identities. The central thesis of the framing is this: The natural
lived human experience of identity is a fragmented one, and should be recognized
and engaged with without (premature) recourse to the traditional notion of a
'unified self' located in a single legal person or human body.

## overview

An "identity", whose fundamental atoms are forever incomplete segments of
varyingly-credible information, whether they be rows in remote databases or
serial episodes retained in the memories of human witnesses, is ultimately an
external construct subject to varying degrees of internalization (i.e.,
acknowledgement or assertion) by the observed subject. When someone announces an
identity, whether it be in the form of a hash on a distributed network, an
account registration on a centralized server, or a 'coming out' as some identity
in some public forum, recognition (and future remembrance) of that identity by
observers is, by tautology, the only kind of identity we can usefully speak
about. An unannounced, unobserved identity is no identity at all, even if
possibly latent as a self-concept.

In other words, we should view identities as possibly-connected segments (i.e.,
finite-length data) in a larger topology. This is neither a surprising nor novel
notion, excepting this: we argue that disjoint (or connected!) segments, even if
constituted by observations of a single human, should not be presumed to be part
of a single identity unless all of the segments represent or contain commitments
to that effect. Whether someone is just a completely different person in the
sense of 'personality' in two different contexts, or whether a single human
lives two completely separate lives under systems like those of Russia, where
[gender or sexual deviance is punished and stigmatized](https://meduza.io/en/news/2015/10/29/russian-lawmakers-introduce-legislation-that-would-criminalize-coming-out),
these topologies of lived identity should be accurately represented (and
therefore supported) and acknowledged.

Apparent plausibility of an identity should not be an issue: as hinted at in
critiques leveled by a multitude of sources
([including the EFF](https://www.eff.org/deeplinks/2015/10/global-coalition-facebook-authentic-names-are-authentically-dangerous-your-users))
at the "Real Name" policies of centralized arbiters, the only "real" identities
are ones that are and continue to be asserted by their apparent subjects.

A wider view has a lot of potential for the future: Aral Balkan, among others,
[takes it further](https://re-publica.de/en/file/republica-2015-aral-balkan-beyond-camera-panopticon),
arguing that laws should recognize that our selves and identities extend into
our devices and should be subject to privacy protections on that basis. What
kind of identities will result from future connections between human bodies and
connected devices? Will governments, societies, or peers recognize the person
that might result from a such a pairing?

In any case, a single human aggregate of DNA, mind, and physical affordances,
whether inborn or provided by machines and infoelectronics, may, in any given
situation, be one of a *multiplex* of identities, each with a (hopefully)
obvious degree of personhood.

What we argue is this:

1. No observer is ever possessed of 'complete' or exhaustive information about a
   pre-supposed subject, to which an identity is traditionally thought to point.
2. All identities are in flux.
3. The only identities that suffer no harm under the traditional norm of a
   unified "one person/identity, one human" are impossibly privileged.
4. Ergo, the most compassionate, respectful, (and also error-free) approach over
   the lifetime of any observed identity is to grant it a due degree of
   personhood (or agency, if you prefer) on its own terms--no external
   unification.

## working with multiplexed identity

In other words, any given identity can only be viewed as (observed) **commitment
to performance**. The degree of that commitment (or series of commitments) and
its fulfillment constitutes a measure of actualization of that identity, as well
as an increase in reputation (in other words, *authenticity* in the sense of
character as well as the more technical sense). We note that this jibes with
both cryptographic views of identity as well as
[those offered up by gender theorists](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Performativity)--it's
as true for a git commit log as it is for a person identifying as a different
gender.

Viewing identity this way, we argue, has some nice properties. It explicitly
avoids conflating credentials, accounts, or the outputs of cryptographic
operations with persons. It crystallizes definitions of privacy and security
into technologically translatable forms that are relatively free of ideology:
privacy becomes the protection of segments from unwanted linking--the segment of
the HIV patient with the full-time employee, for example, or the whistleblower
with the military personnel; security becomes the protection of individual
segments themselves--a breach of security into a Facebook account might result
in the appending of unwanted posts to that segment, while a breach of security
into a financial segment like a bank account or cryptocurrency wallet results in
some really undesirable transactions.

Most notably, in this view, attacks on identity (doxing, investigation,
intrusion, etc.)  become attacks on the integrity or accuracy of the network of
these segments--at best a misrepresentation of that network, at worst, permanent
harm to it (whether physical or otherwise). Since it's a network we all inhabit,
we think that's bad for everyone. On the other side of the coin, this means that
respect for and acknowledgment of identities is a social good in a human sense,
and an affirmation of a distributed network in a technological sense--the only
difference is protocol.

## future prospects and directions

Privacy-respecting, secure (in the senses defined above) distributed systems are
uniquely able to both accurately chart this experience, as well as empower us to
foster or develop identities that have never been possible before. While this is
great news from a technological standpoint, the same systems can certainly also
be employed in a coercive manner. At worst, large-scale information systems,
whether centralized databases with essentially unlimited storage or
decentralized append-only structures, could near-permanently foreclose the
disjoint, varied, and possibly contradictory nascent identities of masses of
people going forward. (Imagine if a government ID system was coupled with an
undeniable append-only log, fed by a ubiquitous surveillance system--then place
it at different points in history.)

Examples of promising systems or protocols that specifically respect and
acknowledge multiplexed identity (in practice if not in presentation):

- Tor (decoupling of location and traffic)
- Qubes OS (UX making fragmentation of use cases easy)
- Pond (petnames + deniability)
- OTR (theoretical deniability + forward security)
- Monero (untraceable transaction paths through ring signatures)

We need to explicitly consider use cases, definitions, and design guidelines for
the subjects of
[threatened](https://modelviewculture.com/pieces/sex-work-and-surveillance),
[minority](https://modelviewculture.com/pieces/everyone-watches-nobody-sees-how-black-women-disrupt-surveillance-theory),
or
[radical](http://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/26/passports-third-gender-option-lawsuit-colorado-resident)
identities at a level that admits of robust generalization, with the goal of
ultimately including everyone in such a framework. Meeting the needs of
persecuted individuals and classes at a given point in history is an essential
achievement of human progress, but offers no guarantees of protection or
recognition of future such identities as they arise--today's champions of the
weak may well become the persecutors of a future generation.

As a starting point for discussion, then, we believe that this is the frame that
new technologies of identity should be considered in.
