# Financing a Self-sovereign Technology Stack

#### by Adrian Gropper

**Technology for Human Autonomy**

Rebooting the Web of Trust aims toward autonomy for individuals. In his
seminal 2017 paper, The Path to Self-Sovereign Identity,
[*https://github.com/ChristopherA/self-sovereign-identity/blob/master/ThePathToSelf-SovereignIdentity.md*](https://github.com/ChristopherA/self-sovereign-identity/blob/master/ThePathToSelf-SovereignIdentity.md)
, Christopher Allen lists ten principles of self-sovereign identity. But
to achieve autonomy, the individual must have agency and agency requires
an ability to act beyond identity.

A self-sovereign agent, able to act autonomously to the extent it’s
human owner allows, will have many of the same ten principles of
self-sovereign identity. Characteristics such as Free software,
standards for interoperability, portability, and censorship-resistance
are a must for a self-sovereign agent. These same characteristics,
however, limit the ability to finance work on a self-sovereign agent in
established ways. Bitcoin, ethereum, and other public blockchains are an
example of self-sovereign technology. Finance of public blockchain
projects is based on issuance of the equivalent of founders’ stock to
the developers and the hope that many of them will maintain the
technology in order to preserve and grow the value of their stake. Could
such a finance mechanism be applied to develop self-sovereign agent
technology?

This is, to a large extent, the structure behind Ethereum dapps and
ConsenSys. As long as Ethereum’s early adopters could reach critical
mass and governance stability, their finance of ConsenSys and similar
support organizations could, in theory, be used to construct an
autonomous agent for an individual. In practice, however an agent
requires secrecy to keep an individual’s policies away from public
disclosure in a manner reminiscent of zero-knowledge proofs. Along with
scalability and the need to sometimes operate without a connection to
the network, Ethereum is not an ideal substrate for a self-sovereign
agent and the public blockchain finance strategy is difficult to apply.

**A Standards-Based Self-Sovereign Technology Stack**

Starting with the second Rebooting Web of Trust, the HIE of One project
has been designed and managed as a reference implementation of a
self-sovereign technology stack. The agency concept is instantiated as
an authorization server based on the User Managed Access (UMA) standard
running as Free software on non-proprietary hardware owned by the
individual. Client access to the authorization server is based on
self-sovereign identity and related credentials of requesting parties.
Autonomy is preserved because the authorization server hides their
owner’s policies just as a wallet hides the owner’s private keys. An
open source reference implementation of standards is nothing more than
an open source project and not financeable in the normal sense of the
term. How are we to create a supported, sustainable product for anyone
to use?

HIE of One, PBC was incorporated in 2014 as a Public Benefits
Corporation to act as the governance and finance entity. The corporation
registered Trustee as trademark for their version of the software and
services. There is also a Trustee hardware option. We then set about to
apply for grants, seek strategic and financial investors, and considered
a token sale linked to the “fat protocol” that is the combination of
UMA, OAuth, Decentralized IDentifier, and Verifiable Credentials
standards combined into the self-sovereign technology stack branded
Trustee.

A technology, be it self-sovereign identity or self-sovereign agency, is
not sufficient to get customers and have a business. Trustee must
actually compete to provide a service that people want to buy and use in
the real world. HIE of One chose health records for seriously ill people
as the service. HIE stands for Health Information Exchange. Seriously
ill or elderly patients interact with many different institutional
systems and need to monitor and connect their interfaces in a practical
way. The healthcare industry is in the process of adopting a standard
for application programming interfaces (API) called FHIR. FHIR is a
RESTful API protected by OAuth and therefore easily adapted to
delegation of control to an UMA authorization server such as Trustee.
The growing availability of health records via a standard API underlies
the value proposition for Trustee as a commercial product.

**Financing Autonomy**

Aside from the blockchain pioneers, there’s little experience with
financing self-sovereign technology in any market segment and it’s not
even clear that the path they took in the first decade can be sustained
or replicated. It’s a bit like Zooko’s Triangle: You can have two of:
Software Freedom, Substitutability, or Decentralization as long as you
finance on the basis of control in one of the three areas. But granting
control to others compromises autonomy.

Over about five years, as we continue to develop Trustee using the open
source, non-commercial collaboration model, HIE of One has tried various
approaches to financing the transition to commercial product. We tried:

-   Government grants (both on our own and as subcontractors)

-   Citizen coops (we help establish and participate in the Digital Life Collective)

-   Physician coops (via established medical societies and start-up physician initiative)

-   Global Healthcare NGOs (in US and UK, but Trustee is not “research”)

-   Blockchain Tokens (so many issues)

-   Blockchain investors (healthcare is sooo complicated)

No luck so far.

**Bootstrapping Self-Sovereign Technology**

HIE of One is now trying something completely different. To the extent a
Free software product can be developed by volunteers and brought to
market without up-front tooling, the customers might finance the
scale-up and commercialization themselves. This is similar to some
public blockchains but the compensation of the developers and early
adopters is not directly linked to the protocol itself. Users subscribe
to the service with some degree of pre-payment and a promise of future
discounts as the network grows.

Can bootstrap financing support self-sovereign autonomy? The software is
licensed under the Affero GPL. The service is substitutable to the
extent the DID, VC, and UMA standards are adopted. The service and
support are mostly decentralized with only governance of the Trustee
brand and contracts related to it under the control of HIE of One.

Business models for self-sovereign identity and self-sovereign
technology are experimental. The standards are just starting to gel. The
interest in systems that promote freedom of speech and assembly is
growing. Business structures for sustainable decentralized and
potentially autonomous systems are still to be invented.
